David D. Kirkpatrick
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/03/world/europe/uk-twitter-russia-brexit.html
Although Twitter reaches a relatively small British audience, Russian efforts to use the platform would suggest that its propagandists were also active on Facebook, which has more users and is much harder for those outside the company to monitor.

Asked about the claim that accounts linked to Russia had also posted about Britain, a Twitter spokesman declined to comment. But the spokesman said that Twitter would support government investigtions into election interference.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Russia is eager to weaken or divide the European Union, which it sees as a threat to its influence in Eastern Europe, so it would not be surprising if it were found to have mounted a campaign in favor of Brexit.

In response to a Congressional inquiry, social media companies acknowledged for the first time this week that Russian agents seeking to roil American politics had reached 126 million users with Facebook posts, published more than 131,000 messages on Twitter and uploaded more than 1,000 videos to Google’s YouTube service.

Facebook said Russia’s internet Research Agency had posted roughly 80,000 pieces of divisive content that was shown to about 29 million people between January 2015 and August 2017, and those posts were then widely shared and reposted to reach far more. The company said it had deleted more than 170 accounts on its photo-sharing app Instagram that had posted about 120,000 pieces of Russia-linked content.

Researchers at the City University of London have already identified an unusual disappearance after the Brexit vote of 13,500 Twitter accounts that were incredibly active around the referendum, the vast majority campaigning for Britain to leave the bloc. All 65,000 messages posted on those accounts in the four weeks before the vote were deleted shortly afterward.

That has raised questions about the possibility that a coordinated “bot army” was deployed, and also about the possibility that Twitter itself may have detected and removed them without disclosing the manipulation. Because creating active Twitter accounts can be costly, owners who use them for campaigns typically prefer not to discard them. A spokesman for Twitter has declined to comment.

In his letter, Mr. Collins, the chairman of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee, asked Twitter for “a list of accounts linked to the Internet Research Agency and any other Russian linked accounts that it has removed and examples of any posts from these accounts that are linked to the United Kingdom.” Mr. Collins asked the company to provide the information by the end of November.