Aurelien Breeden, Benoît Morenne
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/06/world/europe/francois-fillon-france-election.html
Hundreds of Mr. Fillon’s former backers have distanced themselves from him, and some in his party continue to doubt that he can win now. But the developments on Monday seemed to bolster Mr. Fillon’s claims that there is no one suitable to replace him.

“No one can stop me from being a candidate,” Mr. Fillon said on Sunday in an interview on the television channel France 2.

Mr. Juppé, who is mayor of the southwestern city of Bordeaux, told reporters there on Monday that the presidential campaign had been dominated by “unprecedented” confusion.

“What a waste,” he said, accusing Mr. Fillon of squandering the center-right party’s chances of winning.

Mr. Juppé, a moderate, ran in the Republicans’ presidential primary in November but lost to Mr. Fillon, who campaigned on a harder line.

He criticized Mr. Fillon on Monday for his “obstinacy,” and he called Mr. Fillon’s dismissive response to the corruption allegations against him “a dead end.”

But Mr. Juppé, 71, said he was not the man to replace Mr. Fillon now. He said that French voters were hungry for new political faces untainted by scandals, and that he did not quite fit the bill. “It is too late for me,” he said.

Photo

Mr. Fillon, who like Mr. Juppé is a former prime minister, won primaries on the right and center-right in November, led in the polls and appeared to be on track to reach the second round of voting, where he would have a good chance to defeat his likely opponent, Marine Le Pen of the far-right National Front.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But Mr. Fillon’s campaign was upended by reports in the satirical and investigative newspaper Le Canard Enchaîné that his wife and two of his children were paid with taxpayer money to be parliamentary aides, posts that might not have involved much genuine work.

The reports prompted an investigation by financial prosecutors, and they deeply dented Mr. Fillon’s standing in the polls, dropping him to third place behind Ms. Le Pen and Emmanuel Macron, an independent candidate and a former economy minister.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Fillon said last week that judges investigating the embezzlement allegations had summoned him for questioning on March 15. But he defiantly vowed to continue running, even if, as expected, he is formally charged.

That defiance turned what, until then, had been mostly uneasy grumbling into a cascade of defections, with more than 300 backers dropping their support for Mr. Fillon and calling for the Republicans to find a new candidate. An allied party, the centrist Union of Democrats and Independents, also dropped its support for Mr. Fillon.

Nicolas Sarkozy, a former president who also lost to Mr. Fillon in the primaries, said in a statement Monday morning that he wanted to organize a meeting with Mr. Fillon and Mr. Juppé to find a “dignified and credible way out of a situation that can no longer last.”

So far, Mr. Fillon has dug in his heels. At a rally organized on Sunday in Paris, he lashed out at those calling for him to drop out.

“They think I’m alone; they want me to be alone,” a combative Mr. Fillon told the crowd as he stepped on stage at the Trocadéro, across from the Eiffel Tower. “Am I alone?” he asked, and the crowd roared.

“If, by magic, the French had been able to witness what I’ve seen these last weeks, a wave of disgust would submerge them,” Mr. Fillon said, denouncing “those who desert the sinking ship.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Fillon has consistently denied any wrongdoing in the scandal. His wife, Penelope, spoke publicly on Sunday about the matter for the first time since it broke, telling the newspaper Journal du Dimanche that she had carried out “very different tasks” for her husband as a parliamentary assistant, including writing memos and press reviews.

Ms. Fillon also said she had urged her husband to continue his campaign, as did the thousands of supporters who stood under pouring rain Sunday afternoon in Paris, waving French flags and chanting for Mr. Fillon to “hold fast” because “France needs you.”

“It’s the union between the people and the future president,” Franck Patti, 53, a project manager for the city of Paris, said about the rally.

A core faction of Republican rank-and-file voters have stood by Mr. Fillon, dismissing the allegations against him and warning that they could stay home on Election Day if he were to drop out.

“The Republicans must see that Fillon is their natural candidate,” Mr. Patti said.