Adam Nossiter
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/13/world/europe/france-hollande-no-confidence-vote.html
One of those reformers, his present economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, once described the 75 percent proposal as “Cuba without the sunshine,” a remark that highlighted the depth of the split between the centrists and the traditional left, which continued to hew to the language and sometimes the policies of anticapitalist redistribution.

Mr. Hollande has pledged not to run in next year’s election if he is unable to bring the unemployment rate down. So far it has hardly budged, but the president has given indications that he intends to run anyway. If he does and he loses badly, his defeat would most likely provide a spot in the second round of voting to Marine Le Pen, the leader of the far right National Front.

Mr. Hollande’s weakened condition has attracted predators not just on the left of his own party, but on the right as well. Mr. Macron, a former banker who is market-oriented by conviction, has started his own political movement, “On the Way,” much to the irritation of his colleagues in the government. Yet the youthful Mr. Macron — he is only 38 — is way ahead of Mr. Hollande in recent presidential polls cited in the French news media, and only just behind a career mainstream right politician, Alain Juppé, a former prime minister who is currently considered the favorite in the 2017 presidential vote.

Mr. Macron has been mocked in the left-leaning press this week for implicitly comparing himself to Joan of Arc, riding in providentially to save France, at a well-attended speech in Orléans on Sunday.

Photo

The labor law that has provoked months of protests here was Mr. Hollande’s 11th hour bid to bring down unemployment. Much weakened from its original form after months of protests, it gives employers more flexibility negotiating hours and wages with workers. The law takes some of that power away from unions — which, except for some of the more moderate ones, are generally enraged by the reform law — and it defines more precisely when and how companies can lay off workers, a process that is currently time consuming and expensive.

The fury against Mr. Hollande in his own party for those efforts — over 50 Socialist members of Parliament tried and failed to file their own motion of no confidence on Wednesday — has left all but destroyed the Socialists, a party already badly weakened and divided.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The left has ceased to exist, because it doesn’t represent anything,” said Gérard Grunberg, a professor at the Sciences Po political science institute. “There is not one left now, there are a number of lefts,” said Mr. Grunberg. “The party of Mitterrand,” he said, referring to François Mitterrand, the nimble politician who led the Socialists back into power in 1981 after years in the wilderness, “no longer exists.”

The immediate result was “the madness of yesterday,” as Mr. Grunberg put it — Socialists on the party’s far left attempting to eject a Socialist prime minister. “That was something unbelievable,” Mr. Grunberg said. “We’ve never seen that before. They were voting to overthrow their own government.”

That effort failed for lack of lawmakers who were willing to back it, as did Thursday’s motion of censure by the opposition Republicans of the center-right. Yet one of the Socialist rebel leaders — they are called Frondeurs, a reference to 17th century revolutionaries — pledged on Thursday to keep on fighting Mr. Hollande from within his own party.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“It was a very firm warning sent to the government and that is coming from the whole left,” Christian Paul, one of the Socialist rebels, who represents the old region of Mr. Mitterrand, who died in 1996, told French television Thursday. “The left chose Hollande, and it has been disappointed,” Mr. Paul said.

“This is a law of deregulation,” Mr. Paul said. “The French will be less protected, without making it easier for companies to hire.”

Many mainstream economists disagree with Mr. Paul. They say that with all its worker protections, France has effectively enshrined permanent high unemployment. France has made “the choice” of having unemployment, Jean Tirole, a Noble Prize-winning economist, said in an interview with Le Monde this week, adding that the country has “chosen institutions that create unemployment.”

To the deafening sound of police sirens in the streets outside the Parliament building Thursday, Mr. Valls, the prime minister and a pugnacious boxer, defended the labor law. He mocked a Communist deputy who has been loud in opposition, saying, “You’ve been wrong for 100 years.” And he pleaded with the legislators, and the protesters outside, to abandon the assumption of a permanent war between capital and labor.

“How much longer are we going to oppose employers and workers?” Mr. Valls asked. The government merely “wants to allow into the job market, those who are currently excluded. We’ve got to allow our companies to create more jobs.”

The protests, which gathered about 55,000, people on Thursday, according to the Interior Ministry, are scheduled to continue next week.