Adam Nossiter
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/24/world/europe/france-francois-fillon-investigation.html
Prosecutors said at the time that they would take a preliminary look at the allegations, and Mr. Fillon’s standing in the polls immediately plunged. The prosecutor’s office said on Friday that it would hand over the case to investigating magistrates, who would look into Mr. Fillon’s suspected “misuse of public funds.”

The investigative judges have the power to summon Mr. Fillon and others for questioning. His lawyers will now have access to the case files and will have more opportunities to file procedural appeals, which could likely delay the filing of formal charges until after the election.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Still, the full investigation is expected to further damage Mr. Fillon’s appeal among the conservative, often middle-class voters who had supported his victory in the primary. His decline in popularity in rural areas where his focus on integrity was his strongest appeal has been amply documented in the French news media.

Mr. Fillon has angrily denied wrongdoing in speeches, news conferences and television appearances, and he has largely blamed the news media for his problems. His combative stance and his vow to stay in the race — and the lack of an alternative for center-right voters — have enabled him to rally his core supporters and to partly claw his way back in the polls.

By Friday, he had regained second place in many surveys, behind Ms. Le Pen and ahead Mr. Macron.

Under the French system, if no presidential candidate wins a majority of votes, the top two candidates move on to a second round. Ms. Le Pen is expected to win the first round, but the polling until now has suggested that either Mr. Fillon or Mr. Macron would defeat her in round two.

Many conservative voters are thought to be skeptical of Mr. Macron’s service in the Socialist government, his youth (he is 39) and his inexperience.

A series of recent gaffes caused an uproar on the right. On a visit to Algeria, Mr. Macron declared France’s colonization of the country a “crime against humanity” — a red flag in France, where memories of the bloody war over Algerian independence are not so distant.

The comment cost Mr. Macron in the polls, helping both Mr. Fillon and Ms. Le Pen, who faces an inquiry of her own over the possible abuse of public funds.