Neil Macfarquhar
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/13/world/europe/sergei-ivanov-putin-russia.html
At home, as the campaign season starts for Sept. 18 parliamentary elections, Mr. Putin is seen as focused on whipping up enthusiasm for his United Russia party.

The Kremlin press office first issued a terse statement saying that Mr. Ivanov, 63, was being relieved of his duties. Then state television broadcast a chummy meeting between Mr. Putin, Mr. Ivanov and his successor, Mr. Vaino, who had been Mr. Ivanov’s deputy and formerly worked in the Kremlin’s protocol and media operations.

Kremlin decisions like this are often opaque. The change was officially cast as a mutual decision initiated by Mr. Ivanov, who instead of acting as one of the most powerful men in the country, shaping the agenda for the presidential administration, will now be a special envoy for transportation and the environment.

“I am pleased with your performance in the areas you supervised,” Mr. Putin said to Mr. Ivanov, who like the president is a veteran of the K.G.B., the Soviet-era security service, and worked with Mr. Putin in St. Petersburg in the early 1990s.

Mr. Putin said the two men had agreed when Mr. Ivanov was appointed chief of staff in late 2011 that he would stay for no more than four years.

In their staged meeting, Mr. Ivanov seconded that notion, saying that he indeed wanted to move on and thanked the president “for your high regard for the work I have done over the past 17 years.”

Mr. Ivanov, who has a reputation as a hawk, served as defense minister from 2001 to 2007. Considered one of Mr. Putin’s closest allies, he was sometimes mentioned as a possible successor when terms limits forced Mr. Putin to leave office in 2008.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some viewed Mr. Ivanov as the most recent casualty in what seemed to be an orchestrated plan by Mr. Putin, 63, to install a new generation of “servants” to replace his contemporaries, who might still have had the standing to occasionally question his decisions.

“Sergei Ivanov’s dismissal is a sign of Vladimir Putin’s focus on replacing his old friends at top posts in the executive branch with members of the servant staff, however high-ranking and polished they might be,” said Stanislav Belkovsky, a political analyst, speaking on Echo of Moscow radio station. “Psychologically, it’s now more comfortable for Putin to deal with just that kind of people — people who from the very beginning look on him as a grand chief and who don’t remember those times when Vladimir Putin wasn’t a grand chief yet.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The changes started last year with the departure of Vladimir I. Yakunin, the head of Russian railways, who was then so insulted by the low-level rank offered to him in the Federal Council, the upper house of Parliament, that he refused the post. Mr. Putin had long protected Mr. Yakunin despite rumors of rampant corruption, but was reportedly angered by his constant demands for more money for the railroads in a grinding recession

Another old Putin ally from St. Petersburg, Andrei Belyaninov, was forced to resign as the head of the customs office in July, after agents with the F.S.B. state security service searched his house and found hundreds of thousands of dollars in cash stashed in shoe boxes.

In a rare law enforcement battle played out in public, in July the F.S.B. raided the offices of the Investigative Committee, a powerful branch of the prosecutor’s office. Three top officials were arrested and accused of taking bribes, an embarrassment for Alexander Bastrykin, the head of the office and a law school classmate of Mr. Putin’s.

In years past, Mr. Putin’s close associates had been spared such public shaming, but analysts pointed to several reasons for the new treatment.

First, the country has been in recession for two years, and with parliamentary elections coming up Mr. Putin wants to show that his administration is looking out for the general welfare with fresh blood and fresh ideas.

Analysts suggested that Mr. Putin wants to avoid repeating the mistakes of Leonid I. Brezhnev, the head of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982, who is seen as helping cause the country’s collapse by letting the bureaucracy and the country stagnate in tandem.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Ivanov was also responsible for helping shape the Kremlin’s image, which has not been aided in recent months by unfeeling comments, particularly from Dmitri A. Medvedev, the prime minister.

In one public encounter he suggested that schoolteachers unsatisfied with their pay should go into business, and in another told a retiree in Crimea that there was no money to raise pensions. “There just isn’t any money now,” Mr. Medvedev said, before fleeing the encounter with a cheery, “You hang in there!”

Some analysts suggested that Mr. Putin is provoking a new confrontation with Ukraine to finally resolve the political stalemate in eastern Ukraine in his favor and, given the dismay within the electorate over the economy, to secure votes for his supporters in Parliament and produce a show of national solidarity.

Analysts have also detected another trend in recent appointments, with Mr. Putin naming former bodyguards and intelligence agents to important political posts, such as regional governors.

When Yevgeny Zinichev was appointed acting governor of the Kaliningrad region last month, reporters were surprised to find him in earlier pictures working as the president’s bodyguard.

And when Mr. Putin organized a new, powerful national guard last year answering directly to the president, he promoted a former bodyguard, Viktor V. Zolotov, to the rank of army general and made him the director. The new head of customs, Vladimir Bulavin, worked earlier as deputy chief of the F.S.B.

Mr. Putin, the former head of the F.S.B., the successor agency to the K.G.B., was already inclined to trust former bodyguards and members of the agency for their unquestioning loyalty.

That outlook only deepened, given that the wars in Ukraine and Syria have thrust him together more often with advisers from the military and the security services, some analysts pointed out.

“A general from the Ministry of Defense or the F.S.B. will not ask unnecessary questions, or look at Putin through the eyes of a former friend who still expects special treatment,” wrote Ms. Stanovaya of the Carnegie Moscow Center.