Liz Alderman
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/05/world/europe/la-bonne-biere-cafe-hit-in-paris-attacks-is-back-in-business.html
Other cafes caught up in the assaults are expected to reopen in coming weeks, including the nearby Le Comptoir Voltaire and La Belle Équipe, where 20 more people were killed. At Le Carillon and Le Petit Cambodge, just up the street from La Bonne Bière, huge piles of flowers to victims have been pushed back, and locals hope for a reopening soon.

The Bataclan concert hall, where 92 people were killed, is unlikely to open before the end of next year, its owners have said.

Nicole Marot, a retiree, crossed Paris on the Métro to get to La Bonne Bière. Under a sunny sky, she spread a newspaper before her as she sipped an espresso. She did not know any of the victims. “I felt I had to pay homage to all those people who died for nothing,” she said.

Mrs. Marot glanced at the Rue du Faubourg-du-Temple, a cobbled street at a wide intersection that was easy for the assailants to navigate. “The fact that this happened after the killings at Charlie Hebdo means that an attack could happen again,” she said. “But we cannot let a fear of terrorists stop us from living.” Those attacks in January at the offices of Charlie Hebdo, a satirical newspaper, the Hyper Cacher supermarket and in a Paris suburb, left 17 dead.

People continued to lay flowers at a makeshift shrine in front of the cafe, which was adorned with peace signs and messages of support from around the world.

Michel Goulaux brought his grandson, Sasha Kasparian, 11, to Paris from their home in Bouges-le-Château, in the Loire Valley, when they heard La Bonne Bière would reopen. “We’re not Parisian, but this hit all of France,” Mr. Goulaux said. “I wanted to show my grandson that we can resist.”

Placing a candle at the shrine, Sasha said he had been watching the Nov. 13 soccer match at the Stade de France on television when they heard explosions from what was later identified as an attack by suicide bombers.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I was shocked,” he said. “Then we learned that 130 people in all died. I wanted to pay tribute, especially to the young.”

Photo

Just 20 feet away, the Casa Nostra Pizzeria, where one person was killed as the terrorists moved on from La Bonne Bière, remained closed, with three large bullet holes from Kalashnikov rifles pocking a window.

Mohamed Mokhtari, the owner of La Fontaine Fleurie, a flower shop between the two sites, said he nearly missed being caught up in the assault when he turned down an invitation from a colleague to have a drink on the pizzeria’s terrace. Fifteen minutes after he shut his shop, the terrorists came barreling to his corner.

He smiled as he looked to his right, where La Bonne Bière was bustling anew. “Things were just too sad,” he said. “It’s magnificent that they reopened — it’s already breathing new life” into the neighborhood.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Then, Mr. Mokhtari cast a sidelong glance at the Casa Nostra, where the broken glass and ghostly silence exuded gloom as people bought roses from his shop to add to the shrine there.

“I feel like I’m living between two worlds,” he said. “On my left, at the pizzeria, it’s still a monument to the dead. On the right, at the cafe, we have the living, and life going on again.”

He paused and craned his neck toward La Bonne Bière. “Life must go on again,” he said. “It’s the only way.”