Raphael Minder
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/27/world/europe/election-in-spain-gives-conservatives-more-seats-but-no-mandate.html
Another emerging party, Ciudadanos, got 32 seats, down from 40 seats, according to the preliminary results.

No party came close to winning a parliamentary majority on Sunday. Still, the results put Mr. Rajoy back in the driver’s seat, either to try to form a right-wing coalition or to pressure the Socialists into a broader coalition that could help preserve the dominance of Spain’s establishment parties, which Podemos would like to uproot.

Addressing flag-waving supporters outside his party’s headquarters just after midnight, Mr. Rajoy celebrated his victory, but did not shed light on how it might allow him to form a new government.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“From tomorrow, we will have to talk with everybody, and we will do it,” he said, adding that Spain was “walking in the right direction.”

Even if Sunday’s result was the worst ever for the Socialists, it was sufficient to prevent the party from being leapfrogged by Podemos, an outcome that most polls had predicted.

In December, Podemos and Ciudadanos entered Spain’s Parliament for the first time. On Sunday, both parties not only had lost the novelty factor but also disappointed some voters after six months of bruising and fruitless coalition negotiations.

“Some parties promised to change the country and then showed us that they were just happy to join the shameful old game of just throwing dirt at each other,” Daniel Martín, a graphic designer, said as he prepared to vote in central Madrid earlier on Sunday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Podemos was hoping to mirror in Spain the success of Syriza, the far-left party that took office in Greece in 2015. Formed less than two years ago, Podemos has garnered much of its support among a Spanish youth hit by high unemployment and angered by the endemic corruption among established parties, with rising economic inequality since the financial crisis of 2008.

Pablo Iglesias, the leader of Podemos, said at a news conference on Sunday that the result was disappointing and surprising. He added, “The news today is unfortunately that the Popular Party has increased its support.”

Mr. Rajoy, 61, presented himself as the custodian of Spanish unity and continuity in the face of far younger opponents, as well as a challenge from secessionist politicians in Catalonia.

About 70 percent of eligible voters participated in Sunday’s elections, which was in line with the turnout six months ago. Still, many of those who waited outside a polling station here expressed disillusionment at being forced back to the polls by Spain’s main parties.

“I really believe that we need change and a clean, fair and transparent society, but there’s no question that people are pretty tired of our politicians and having to vote again now,” said Galia Martínez Matei, a 31-year-old interior designer who voted for Podemos.