Gardiner Harris, Victor Homola
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/09/world/europe/angela-merkel-recep-tayyip-erdogan.html
Ms. Merkel said that it was in Germany’s interest not to distance itself from Turkey, but that the dispute involved fundamental principles like the freedom of the press, speech and assembly.

Addressing the Turks living in Germany, Ms. Merkel said: “We want to do everything in order to prevent conflicts emanating from the domestic situation in Turkey from being carried into our coexistence here. Let us continue, wherever possible, to promote and further improve our way of living together. This is a matter close to our hearts.”

At a news conference in Ankara, the Turkish capital, Prime Minister Binali Yildirim was less conciliatory, accusing Germany of meddling in Turkey’s internal politics, which he called “a grave mistake.” Mr. Yildirim said Germany was quietly pushing for the defeat of the constitutional referendum, adding that Germany’s efforts would backfire and lead most Turks living in Germany to support the referendum.

“We have a hard time understanding the reason they will be disturbed by a ‘yes’ ” vote on the referendum, Mr. Yildirim said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

He also suggested on Thursday that the government would extend a state of emergency — during which tens of thousands of teachers, police officers, judges and opposition politicians have been jailed without charges or trials — by three months. But Mr. Yildirim later appeared to backtrack, telling journalists that the government’s National Security Council, of which he is a member, will have to take up the matter. At a second news conference, Ibrahim Kalin, a powerful assistant to Mr. Erdogan, said a decision had yet to be reached on whether to extend the emergency period.

Mr. Kalin said Turkey’s European and American allies had unfairly criticized Turkey’s crackdown that came after last year’s coup attempt. “The Turkish public in general is disappointed that Turkey has not received the kind of support it expected after this coup,” Mr. Kalin said.

In a third briefing on Thursday for foreign journalists, Bekir Bozdag, Turkey’s justice minister, blamed a smear campaign by “terrorist organizations” for tricking American and European journalists into holding critical views of Turkey’s crackdown. “For instance, when you have a look at the emails of nearly all journalists in the U.S. and Europe, you can see that they have received propaganda messages from terrorist organizations,” Mr. Bozdag said.

In further comments, Mr. Yildirim condemned President Trump’s decision to use the phrase “radical Islamic terrorism” in his speeches and other public remarks, calling the phrase “divisive” language that alienates the vast majority of peaceful Muslims. “If you mention a religion in the same sentence as terrorism, then the followers of that religion — in this case two billion people — will be offended,” Mr. Yildirim said. “When you use the phrase ‘Islamic terrorism,’ all Muslims are offended.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Yildirim, Mr. Kalin and Mr. Bozdag all warned the Trump administration that relations between Turkey and the United States could worsen significantly if the United States failed to extradite Fethullah Gulen, the leader of a religious organization who lives in Pennsylvania and whom the Turkish authorities accused of masterminding the failed coup attempt in July.

Turkey has provided documentation to the Justice Department that it claims proves Mr. Gulen’s guilt, the three said. So far, the American authorities have yet to agree. “I can clearly say that whatever Osama bin Laden means for American citizens, Fethullah Gulen means for the Turkish people,” Mr. Bozdag said. He said he expected to have a phone conversation soon with the United States attorney general, Jeff Sessions, to discuss his country’s extradition request.

Scores of journalists have been arrested in recent months in Turkey, but Mr. Bozdag said none had been detained because of their journalism.

Mr. Yildirim and Mr. Kalin also said relations could suffer if the United States chose to attack the Syrian city of Raqqa, the headquarters of the Islamic State, with Kurdish forces whom Turkey views as allied with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ Party. The Trump administration “needs to win the hearts and minds of Turkish public opinion,” Mr. Yildirim said. “And at the moment, the Turkish public has a very negative opinion of the United States.”