The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/01/world/europe/new-years-eve-security.html
Berlin

A “party mile” established between the Brandenburg Gate and the Victory Column has been cordoned off since Christmas, Deutsche Welle reported. The festivities, which typically draw hundreds of thousands of people, will go on, but backpacks, bags, suitcases, folding chairs, glass bottles, fireworks, megaphones and laser pointers have been banned. There will be 900 police officers and 600 security stewards on site, the news agency reported, the highest number ever.

Vienna

The authorities in Austria said they had received a warning on Saturday from a “friendly” foreign intelligence service about possible terrorist attacks on New Year’s Eve in European cities. They have not disclosed details, but the authorities have not called off the usual festivities in Austria, known for its New Year’s Eve balls. Hundreds of police officers, including some from special security units, will be deployed throughout the capital.

Photo

Moscow

Red Square will be closed to the public, although the Russian authorities said the move had nothing to do with security issues. Instead, entry to the square will be limited to guests invited to a recording of a concert by the state television network Channel One. Alexey Mayorov, the city’s security chief, told Agence France-Presse that the message from the police would be that the “Red Square is closed for an event, and that there are a lot of other places around where people can have a wonderful time.” But a former lawmaker, Alexander Klyukin, told Kommersant radio that the move was “the same as closing off Times Square in New York.”

Madrid

For the first time, the authorities have imposed limits on the number of people who will be allowed to attend festivities at Puerta del Sol square in Madrid (tens of thousands of people traditionally gather there to eat 12 grapes to coincide with the 12 chimes of the clock), El País reported. About 600 police officers, firefighters and paramedics will be stationed in the center of the Spanish capital, where the police will be carrying out bag and body searches.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

London

The British authorities have canceled time off for more than 2,000 armed officers as part of its biggest security presence for New Year’s Eve celebrations, the newspaper The Daily Telegraph reported. Six thousand police officers will be on duty in the capital, but the enhanced security is not just limited to London: Extra police officers will be on hand at celebrations across the country.

Las Vegas

Nearly 1,000 uniformed police officers, backed by an undisclosed number of undercover ones, will be providing security for the hundreds of thousands of people expected to converge on the four-mile Las Vegas Strip, The Associated Press reported. As in the past, people were being encouraged to leave behind bags, backpacks and strollers, but sensitivities are higher than normal in light of recent attacks, including a mass shooting in San Bernardino and a driver in Las Vegas who plowed into pedestrians.