Andrew Higgins, Liam Stack
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/20/world/europe/pope-francis-malta-journalist.html
Mr. Muscat said in an interview that, because of the wide range of people who came under scrutiny from Ms. Caruana Galizia, “it would be rushing to conclusions to just point a finger in one direction.”

He acknowledged that “it is a difficult case” but added: “I want to make sure as prime minister that our investigators have the necessary resources and know-how to get to the bottom of this.”

But at a shambolic news conference on Thursday evening, Malta’s police commissioner, Lawrence Cutajar, only deepened a sense among many Maltese that the country’s police force had little chance of finding the culprit, despite being aided by investigators from the F.B.I. and the Netherlands.

Six previous car bombings since last year, all of them involving people linked to criminal groups, have gone unsolved.

Gozo 5 Miles Comino Ferry Mediterranean Sea REPUBLIC OF MALTA Sardinia ITALY Malta Bidnija Valletta Sicily MALTA TUNISIA Mediterranean Sea Gozo Mediterranean Sea Comino Ferry Malta REPUBLIC OF MALTA Bidnija Valletta 10 Miles

Mr. Cutajar did not provide many answers; he reacted with irritation when a reporter pointed out that he, too, had been a target of Ms. Caruana Galizia’s reports.

A flurry of online petitions initiated by supporters and foes of the government have alternately praised and denounced Mr. Muscat’s handling of the case.

The opposition leader, Adrian Delia, has seized on the murder to demand the resignation of the prime minister, the police commissioner and various officials appointed by Mr. Muscat. “We do not have faith in the police force,” he said in an interview. “It is not there to protect us but is a puppet of the political leadership.” The murder, he said, was “ not a one-off fluke” but a sign that the country’s “institutions are being dismantled.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Simon Busuttil, the former leader of the opposition, said on Friday that he was “embarrassed” by the police commissioner’s fumbling and evasive performance. “I thought I was watching a third world country,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Malta Independent, a leading newspaper, also mocked the police commissioner, saying on Friday that his news conference had clarified only one thing: Mr. Cutajar “has to go, now.”

Malta has had five police commissioners since the Labour Party came to power in 2013, a constant reshuffling of law enforcement leadership that Mr. Muscat, the prime minister who made the changes, said “is not something I’m proud of.”

Mr. Muscat’s political opponents accuse him of neutering the police force for political reasons so as to save his allies from serious investigations into allegations of secret offshore bank accounts, kickbacks, money laundering and other forms of corruption. Many of these allegations arose from the writings of Ms. Caruana Galizia.

Under pressure from the European Union to ensure that her murder is properly investigated, Mr. Muscat said ahead of a summit meeting in Brussels that Malta would consider asking the police agency Europol to get involved and promised to “stop at nothing” to find out who killed the journalist.

In an emotional Facebook post on Tuesday, Matthew Caruana Galizia, one of the victim’s three sons, said his mother had been “assassinated because she stood between the rule of law and those who sought to violate it.” He blamed the police, writing that it was “incompetence and negligence that resulted in a failure to prevent this from happening.”

On Thursday, Mr. Galizia said his family had refused a request from the government to endorse a reward of one million euros for information leading to the conviction of his mother’s killer. Instead, the family assailed “the people in government who stood to gain from our mother’s murder” and called for Mr. Muscat to step down.

“A government and a police force that failed our mother in life will also fail her in death,” the son wrote. “The people who for as long as we can remember sought to silence our mother cannot now be the ones to deliver justice.”