Tim Arango, Ceylan Yeginsu, Ben Hubbard
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/19/world/europe/turkey-erdogan-crackdown.html
But for the time, Mr. Erdogan stuck with a single-minded determination to punish anyone deemed disloyal. It was not clear how the state would keep functioning with so many crucial posts suddenly left vacant and paranoia and finger-pointing rampant. The government suspended vacations for the country’s three million civil servants, an effort that seemed intended to make sure the machinery of the state did not halt.

As the purge accelerated on Monday, the government was in particular targeting followers of the cleric Fethullah Gulen, a former ally turned rival who lives in exile in Pennsylvania, and whom Mr. Erdogan has blamed for trying to topple the government.

A senior Turkish official, speaking on the condition of anonymity in line with government protocol, said that members of the Gulen movement in the military had been under investigation for some time and that the group had pushed forward the coup conspiracy out of a sense of emergency when they realized they might face prosecution.

The suspended judges, the senior official said, were allied with the military faction behind the coup. And like others, the official said, they were actually on lists of suspected enemies compiled by the government even before the coup took place.

Turkish officials have acknowledged that the number of people rounded up was likely much greater than the actual roll of conspirators. But they maintain that it is necessary to prevent more attacks against civilians and government buildings, especially while some perpetrators are still at large. In Ankara, closed-door hearings were held for some of the accused plotters.

Mr. Erdogan’s almost singular focus on the purges was probably fueled in part by his realization that support for the coup ran deeper in the military than initially thought — and by having just barely managed to outmaneuver the plotters.

Units from across Turkey’s armed forces, including the air force, the army and the gendarmerie, a military-style police force, worked simultaneously. The coup plotters waged airstrikes on the Parliament building, shut down bridges and seized top military commanders. Fighter jets were able to refuel in midair.

Photo

“These were serious people very close to the top of military power,” said Matthew Bryza, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council. He added, “There is a sense there that the entire Turkish system as we know it was imperiled and narrowly escaped.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The government’s focus on accusations against Mr. Gulen, who has denied any involvement in the coup, has heightened tensions between the United States and Turkey. Turkish officials have publicly reinstated demands that Mr. Gulen be extradited to Turkey — though, according to American officials, no formal judicial request has been made. Some Turkish officials have run with the idea of a global conspiracy, accusing the United States of partnering with Mr. Gulen to orchestrate the coup.

John Bass, the American ambassador to Turkey, issued a statement on Monday saying: “Some news reports — and, unfortunately, some public figures — have speculated that the United States in some way supported the coup attempt. This is categorically untrue, and such speculation is harmful to the decades-long friendship between two great nations.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Kerry said Monday that the United States would consider extradition for Mr. Gulen if the Turks “send us evidence, not allegations.”

He continued, “We need to see genuine evidence that withstands the standard of scrutiny that exists in many countries, the system of law with respect to the issue of extradition, and if it meets that standard there’s nothing, there’s no interest we have, in standing in the way of appropriately honoring the treaty that we have with Turkey with respect to extradition.”

Turkey is facing multiple security challenges, including terrorism by the Islamic State and a war with Kurdish militants in the southeast. The upheaval in Turkey’s security services, and the deep divisions within them that the coup attempt laid bare, are likely to affect Turkey’s ability to manage the country’s threats.

Video

Prime Minister Binali Yildirim told reporters on Monday that the country was “strong enough to eliminate multiple threats at the same time. Turkey is a great country with 100 years of experience.”

Mr. Erdogan reiterated on Monday that the Turkish people had called for the restoration of the death penalty for those involved in the revolt and said that his government would consider it.

Turmoil in the Middle East in recent years had made Turkey an essential ally of the West in handling the fallout from the civil war in Syria, battling extremists of the Islamic State and stemming the flow of refugees to Europe. Yet the widespread turmoil inside Turkey’s military now could hamper the country’s ability to remain engaged in those crises, analysts said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The United States had come to see Turkey as a crucial member of the international coalition bombing the jihadists in Iraq and Syria. The Turkish Army is charged with securing the Syrian border, and American military and surveillance jets launch regular missions from Turkey’s Incirlik air base. But two Turkish jets from the base participated in the attempted coup, and the base’s Turkish commander was implicated in the plot, raising questions for American forces about the base’s security.

“This will have serious disruption in the way in which the coalition carries out its operations,” said Aaron Stein, a Turkey analyst at the Atlantic Council.

The vast scale of the purges, especially among the security forces, has also left Turkish citizens anxious over how the country will maintain stability and order when it is reeling from a string of terrorist attacks by the Islamic State and Kurdish militants.

“The president is calling people out to the streets to stand guard against threats, and people are going, but how is this possible when there are active terrorist cells all over the country?” asked Seda Kapici, a lawyer, who was discussing the weekend’s events with a friend at a coffee shop in the Beyoglu district of Istanbul.

She added, “Everyone is on edge, and with these purges, I don’t know how people are going to be able to go about their normal lives.”