Sewell Chan
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/25/world/europe/paris-attacks-belgium.html
In addition, a global manhunt continues for Salah Abdeslam, 26, a Belgian-born Frenchman believed to be the only direct participant in the attack who is still alive, and Mohamed Abrini, 30, who was seen on video driving with Mr. Abdeslam two days before the attacks.

The Paris attacks prompted intense scrutiny of ineffective and convoluted governance in Belgium, where a vast majority of the attackers had ties.

In his annual Christmas message, which was prerecorded but broadcast on Thursday, King Philippe offered exceptionally blunt remarks.

“We continue, unfortunately, to be marked by the dramatic attacks perpetrated in Paris, and realize the dangers that continue to weigh on us,” said the king, who as a constitutional monarch is required to stay above politics but who serves as the symbol of the nation.

Philippe said that the Belgian authorities had “reacted with calm, speed and determination” to the terrorist threats, but he added, “The recent events proved how important it is to invest in justice, the police, the army and intelligence services.”

He also appealed for tolerance, saying that a large majority of Belgians of immigrant backgrounds “share the values of our country,” and that “they are the sons and daughters of this country.”

He continued: “It seems important to me to return to the foundation of our society, to what we most wish to hold on to: our values and the rules of coexistence. This implies that we teach our children to respect different religions and philosophical convictions. What they all share is the desire to give meaning to life, to respect others and to be open toward them. Respecting these common rules also implies zero tolerance toward hate speech. It means fighting, day after day, all forms of stigmatization and segregation, and helping people who are drawn to fanatical indoctrination to resist.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Abdoullah C. appears to have been one of them. He is “suspected to have had several contacts” with Hasna Aitboulahcen, a 26-year-old cousin of Abdelhamid Abaaoud, 28, the Belgian believed to have been the chief planner of the attacks, according to the prosecutor’s office.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Ms. Aitboulahcen, Mr. Abaaoud and another man were killed on Nov. 18, when French special police units stormed an apartment in the northern Paris suburb of St.-Denis, not far from the stadium where three attackers blew themselves up on Nov. 13.

Abdoullah C. had contacts with Ms. Aitboulahcen in the period “between the terrorist attacks and the events in St.-Denis,” the prosecutor’s office said.

A pretrial hearing was to be held on Thursday to decide whether to continue Abdoullah C.’s detention, but it was rescheduled for Jan. 7 after his lawyers asked for more time to prepare their case.

The other eight people facing criminal charges in Belgium are:

■ Mohamed Amri and Hamza Attou, who are accused of being Mr. Abdeslam’s getaway drivers;

■ Abraimi Lazez and Ali Oulkadi, who are accused of helping Mr. Abdeslam after the attacks;

■ Abdellah Chouaa, who according to the French newsmagazine Le Point is the son of a well-known radical preacher in Brussels and who is suspected of being an associate of Mr. Abdeslam’s;

■ Mohamed Bakkali, who lived at a house in the Belgian town of Auvelais that may have been used as a hide-out;

■ And two men, identified only as Samir Z. and Pierre N., who are believed to have been friends of Bilal Hadfi, one of the attackers.

On Tuesday, Prime Minister Charles Michel announced overhauls of the military and the police. The government will spend 9.2 billion euros, about $10.1 billion, to replace the country’s aging F-16 fighter jets and buy two new warships, while the national police force will be restructured to send 2,500 more uniformed officers into the field and to focus their efforts around terrorism and major crimes.