Alison Smale, Kimberly Bradley
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/19/world/europe/refugees-paris-attacks.html
And the role in the attacks of a man who used a Syrian passport — even though he was probably not the true owner of the document — reinforced Europe’s fears that extremists would mix in with the vast human flow.

Although that flow has dwindled, it is still sizable. In November, about 4,000 a day were landing on Greek islands from Turkey; the average in October was 10,000.

Video

Across Europe, governments, volunteers and aid workers still care for migrants on the move and for asylum seekers who have recently arrived.

President François Hollande of France on Wednesday repeated his commitment to take in 30,000 migrants from Syria and Iraq, though he said asylum seekers would be checked to make sure that none posed a threat.

In Paris after the assaults, a group of Afghans and others sleeping in parks and other spaces near the restaurants that were attacked expressed no fear of reprisals or mistreatment.

“I have been in Paris for a month, and I am very happy,” said Azim Mghakhel, a young Afghan. “They give us what we need — bedding, food, showers. And you know, even the buildings are beautiful here!”

Photo

But in Slovenia, a country of two million that has seen more than 225,000 refugees pass through it since Oct. 17, aid workers worry that the attacks in Paris will polarize a population unused to absorbing or even seeing migrants.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Despite the wary mood and harsher language, there do not appear to be major changes to border procedures since last Friday.

In the Serbian capital, Belgrade, Hozan Sabri, 30, a history teacher from Qamishli, Syria, expressed confidence that European authorities would distinguish potential terrorists from those fleeing wars and persecution.

He said he had spent three years in a Syrian jail for refusing to shoot unarmed protesters during his obligatory military service. “When they hear my story,” he said of German authorities, “they will support me.”

That is not as certain as it was back in September, when Germans and Austrians flocked to railroad stations with flowers, food, drink and applause for the new arrivals.

In Germany early Sunday, an arson fire on the Baltic Sea island of Usedom destroyed the roof of a two-story office building that had been converted to house 15 refugees. The same property had already been set on fire in October.

The nationalist Alternative for Germany party, which has been unable to attract more than 5 percent of votes in elections, the threshold for representation in state or federal legislatures, has steadily increased its hold across the country.

“I told a refugee what had happened in Paris,” said Mr. Aryubi, who volunteers with the Austrian branch of the Roman Catholic charity Caritas at the Westbahnhof train station in Vienna, where tens of thousands of refugees have arrived, most en route to Germany. “The refugee said, ‘What happens if this happens again? What can we do?’ ”