Ben Hubbard
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/18/world/europe/many-turks-prefer-even-flawed-democracy-to-coup.html
For many in Istanbul and Ankara, where most of the fighting between those involved in the coup and the security services took place, Sunday was a day of loud pro-government rallies and funerals for the more than 260 people killed over the weekend, most of them civilians or members of government forces that opposed the coup.

Turkey’s nearly 85,000 mosques broadcast funeral prayers at midday to honor the dead. Outside a mosque in Istanbul’s Besiktas neighborhood, crowds of mourners filed though a white tent, shedding tears and embracing the relatives of Senal Sagman, a local activist from Mr. Erdogan’s Justice and Development Party who was killed in a confrontation with pro-coup soldiers.

“There is no God but God!” they chanted while carrying Mr. Sagman’s coffin, draped in a red Turkish flag, and placing it in the back of a truck.

While there were no demonstrations of popular support for the coup during the weekend, Mr. Erdogan’s supporters sprang into action to oppose it.

Nuri Donen, a local party official attending the funeral, said he was crossing the Bosporus Bridge on Friday night when he saw soldiers blocking traffic in the other direction. He first assumed that there had been another terrorist attack, like the recent strike on Istanbul’s main airport. When he found out that a coup attempt was underway, Mr. Donen said, he rushed to join other party activists who were guarding a police station.

He is old enough to remember the coup in 1980, which he said had been welcomed at first for putting an end to deadly street violence. But, he declared, “the coup period is over.”

Photo

“You cannot rule by force,” Mr. Donen added. “You have to rule by the will of the people.”

For Mr. Erdogan’s supporters, the coup’s failure was a relief that they believed would strengthen his mandate.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“When the F-16s were flying overhead, we thought it was all over,” said Zerrin Kuday, 24, who runs a Turkish bagel cart in a conservative Istanbul neighborhood. Now, she wants Mr. Erdogan to harshly punish those who tried to topple him.

Ms. Kuday acknowledged that Mr. Erdogan’s opponents had accused him of acting like a dictator, but she said his tenure had been positive for her. The economy has grown, government services have improved, and public space has been expanded for religious women, like her, who wear Islamic head coverings.

A coup could have reversed that progress, she said.

“It’s not a matter of party,” she said. “It’s a matter of country, of homeland.”

Photo

In some ways, Mr. Erdogan and his allies were lucky that the coup failed so quickly.

Opposition to him and his policies remains strong in other parts of Turkish society. And while the leadership and organization of the uprising remained unclear, Turkey’s justice minister said on Sunday that about 6,000 people had been detained on suspicion of involvement in the coup, suggesting a large plot.

Had the coup’s backers captured Mr. Erdogan or his prime minister, Binali Yildirim, and prolonged the uncertainty, other opposition elements might have mobilized.

Mr. Erdogan has blamed followers of Fethullah Gulen, a Turkish cleric who leads a vast social movement from exile in Pennsylvania, for the plot. The Turkish government has demanded that the United States extradite Mr. Gulen, and Mr. Erdogan vowed on Sunday to “clean all state institutions of the virus” of Mr. Gulen’s supporters.

The United States has not granted previous extradition requests, but said it would look at any evidence Turkey could provide that implicated Mr. Gulen in crimes. Mr. Gulen, in an interview on Saturday, denied any involvement and condemned the coup as anti-democratic.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

A minority of Turks interviewed on Sunday said they wished the coup had succeeded, arguing that military intervention was the only way to stop Mr. Erdogan from gaining more power.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And reflecting Mr. Erdogan’s reputation as a wily political operator, some said they suspected that he had engineered the coup to justify even tougher action against his opponents.

At a small pub a short walk from Mr. Sagman’s funeral, three gray-haired men sharing a Sunday afternoon beer listed the reasons they hated Mr. Erdogan: He is power-hungry, he uses religion to rally his supporters, and he is trying to bring Turkey closer to the Arab world and its conservatism.

But they disagreed on the best way to oppose him.

“I really, personally, want him to be ousted,” said Mustafa Kaya, a retired factory worker. “It would be a step back for democracy, but we can’t improve without coups. That is our society.”

His friend Halil Aydiner, a retired teacher, disagreed, saying Turkey was better off if the military remained in the barracks.

“Now we have the sword at our neck, but not the sharp edge,” he said. “If there is a coup, we’ll face the sharp edge.”