Alissa J. Rubin, Aurelien Breeden
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/10/world/europe/bataclan-paris-attacks.html
Video

PARIS — The third attacker at the Bataclan concert hall, where 90 people were killed in the terrorist attacks here last month, was a 23-year-old native of northeastern France who had gone to fight in Syria, a lawyer for his family said Wednesday.

Without giving a name, the authorities confirmed that the last Bataclan attacker had been identified, and the lawyer later said he was Foued Mohamed-Aggad.

It was Mr. Mohamed-Aggad’s mother who first alerted the authorities that her son was probably one of the gunmen who opened fire on concertgoers on Nov. 13, the lawyer, Françoise Cotta, said in a phone interview.

Mr. Mohamed-Aggad’s mother had “been without news of him for several months,” Ms. Cotta said, when she received a text message from Syria saying that he had “died a martyr on Nov. 13.” Ms. Cotta said that the mother then asked her to alert the authorities and that a DNA match was made.

Photo

Mr. Mohamed-Aggad was one of a group of young men from Strasbourg and its region, friends and brothers, who left for Syria at the end of 2013, according to the lawyer and the French news media. All were reported to have been in contact with a man identified as one of the principal French jihadist recruiters, Mourad Farès, who is now in prison here. Their departure from working-class districts of housing projects, reported by the French news media, caused a stir. Mr. Mohamed-Aggad lived with his mother in a housing project in the small town of Wissembourg, about 40 miles north of Strasbourg.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Farès was described as “an especially dangerous individual, close to terrorist jihadist movements,” by the French interior minister, Bernard Cazeneuve, after his arrest in Turkey last year. Of the 10 from the Strasbourg area who went to Syria in 2013, two appear to have been killed in combat, while seven returned to France and were arrested. They include Mr. Mohamed-Aggad’s brother, who is also in jail.