Barbara Surk, Rick Lyman
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/28/world/europe/balkans-slovenia-reel-as-number-of-refugees-migrants-hits-record.html
The remaining 12,000 or so are at government registration centers, stuck on trains or buses, or simply in the open, roughing it in the increasingly cold fields and forests of the ragged foothills.

“When Hungary closed its border, the Slovenian politicians said, ‘Oh, we are prepared,’ ” said Natasa Pirc Musar, president of the Slovenian Red Cross. “They said Slovenia could handle 2,500 people a day. The problem is, we are getting 10,000 a day and hearing reports that it will soon grow to 13,000. This is something Slovenia cannot cope with anymore.”

On Sunday, European Union officials approved a 17-point plan that may not see fruition for months. It includes more accommodations in Greece, the European Union country the migrants usually enter first, as well as along the entire migrant trail through the Balkans, plus fresh reserves of border guards and injections of cash to help financially struggling Balkan nations pay for all of this.

Video

Slovenia’s foreign minister, Karl Erjavec, said his country would welcome the support of other European countries, including 400 new police officers. But he warned that Slovenia could not accommodate the growing number of people in need for long without outside support. If help does not come soon, he said, the country will take unilateral measures, including potentially building its own fence along the Croatian border and deploying additional troops to guard the frontier.

“All plans remain on the table if promises from the Brussels summit are not fulfilled,” Mr. Erjavec said.

Refugee officials worry that it is too little too late, and that the new plan will suffer the same fate as all of the previous, ineffectual European Union efforts to manage and cope with the largest movement of people across Europe since World War II.

“This should have been done months ago,” said Babar Baloch, spokesman in Hungary for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mrs. Pirc Musar, the Slovenian Red Cross president, said, “We are trying to use a small fire extinguisher to kill a giant fire.”

Meanwhile, migrants — exhausted, cold and frequently forced to stop — are growing impatient, crossing one border after another.

Groups of young men from Afghanistan and other countries, noticeably more aggressive toward the police than the terrified families traveling with them, are becoming a challenge for the authorities and other refugees.

“They were pushing so hard, those men, but my husband got the beatings from the police,” said Yasmin Ayoud, a 27-year-old Syrian, who gently pulled back a bandage from her husband’s head to expose the wound while her sister-in-law, Joumana, silently watched.

Ms. Ayoud and her husband, Houssam, 32, had been at the police barricade in the town of Brezice, near the Croatian border, when groups of young men began chanting “Let us go!” and pushed forward.

“I got panicked and leaned forward and grabbed Yasmin with one hand and Joumana with the other, screaming ‘Hold onto me!’ when the blow came from above,” Mr. Ayoud said. “The policeman must have thought I was shouting at him. I was not. I was just afraid.”

The problem is that within two days of the Hungarian border closing, the numbers entering Slovenia were already larger than what the authorities could manage to register, house, feed and transport onward.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

With the swelling numbers, the process is slower, and patience is being tested among the refugees.

“There is a lot of good will in all of these countries, but once the situation becomes unmanageable, it gets turned over to the police and to them it’s a problem of crowd management,” said Mr. Baloch, the refugee agency spokesman. “And that leads to a situation where you have 3,000, 4,000 or even more people stranded in the open and at the mercy of the weather.”

An encampment has risen in the zone between the Slovenian and Croatian frontiers at the main border crossing at Rigonce, despite the burning of 29 tents last week, apparently a protest by migrants. Hundreds of blankets, heaters and containers of clothes were destroyed.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“These people just want to move on, and when they are made to stop, they get nervous and extremely unhappy and then such incidents happen,” said Bostjan Sefic, a senior official in the Slovenian Interior Ministry.

Police officers and military troops scour the countryside searching for groups of people who had slipped around the border crossing, trying to redirect them to official reception centers — all of which were at capacity.

One night last week, a group of migrants missed a bridge crossing and tried to wade across a frigid river when a Slovenian police helicopter saw them and used its spotlight to guide them.

People waiting at the border to be taken to reception centers by bus, if they were lucky, or by foot, if they were not, were hungry and thirsty and agitated this week. Relief workers complained about the lack of communication between the police and relief workers, and between the Croatian government and the Slovenians, which made the situation almost impossible to manage.

“There is no way you can plan such a huge wave of people if you do not receive information in time,” said Mrs. Pirc Musar. “A few days ago, we were preparing for 1,000 people, and all of a sudden somebody calls and says that Croatia just ejected 2,500 people from trains and were sending them walking across the border.”

At the frontier of Austria, aid workers worried what might happen if the country closed its border or, worse yet, if Germany — the desired goal of many of the migrants — announced that it could take no more people.

“We are simply overwhelmed and overcrowded,” said Leo Josefus, a police spokesman at the Austrian border town of Spielfeld, a short walk from Sentilj. “There is no space for all of them, not now and not tomorrow, unfortunately.”

Train service between the border and the nearest major Austrian city, Graz, has been suspended for fears migrants on the tracks will be struck.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

One night at the Spielfeld crossing, families forced to sleep in the open air struggled to keep their distance from rabble-rousing young men. Even many Syrian men were wary of mixing with migrants from other countries.

“We don’t want trouble with the police or anybody else,” said Sohaib Kahtani, 21, who fled the Syrian province of Deir Ezzor.

Young men from Afghanistan and elsewhere were frequently provoking fights, Mr. Kahtani said. A group of three Afghans offered Mr. Kahtani and a traveling companion $300 for their Syrian passports and grew abusive when they refused.

“They were very aggressive and we ran away from them,” he said.

Still, Mr. Kahtani said he sympathized with the plight of the young Afghans.

“I don’t want to offend them,” he said. “I know they had hard lives far away from this world. But we Syrians, we had schools and we had cities and restaurants and music and joy with friends before this war destroyed all of our lives.”