Alison Smale
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/15/world/europe/as-germany-welcomes-migrantssexual-attacks-in-cologne-point-to-a-new-reality.html
Sara said that she and her friend decided to seek safety outside the station with police officers, who were themselves helpless. “I never experienced that a policeman says, ‘I would love to help you, but I can’t.’ That was really the worst,” she said. “Who should I turn to as a woman? What should I do?”

Sara said she had not yet formally lodged a complaint because she was sick, but intended to do so.

According to the police reports, the precinct closest to the station received 30 to 50 complaints of sexual assault and theft in the first hour of the New Year. Women who came to the precinct were crying; several of them left when the sole female officer available could not quickly note their complaint.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Later that morning, an initial news release from the police described the evening’s events as “peaceful.” It is still not clear, as many in the public have since charged, whether the police were covering up their failings, or the fact that migrants were involved, or whether it simply took several days for the full scope of the assaults to come to light.

While national and international news media focused on the terrorism scare that forced the police to clear two stations in Munich on New Year’s Eve, local websites and the local Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger newspaper reported women saying that they had been harassed on Jan. 1. By late Jan. 2, the police issued an online appeal for people to come forward if they had experienced or witnessed crime.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Since then, the police have received 653 complaints of robberies and sexual assaults, and several rapes. The mother of a 19-year-old who said she had been raped called the police by 10 a.m. on Jan. 1, and officers went to the teenager’s hotel, getting her and two other women to a gynecological exam.

Even the relatively dry language of the police report issued this week — summarizing at least 90 complaints of sexual harassment — makes the situation graphically clear. It refers over and over to victims surrounded by men and “groped in intimate area,” “grabbed by breasts and bottoms,” or even “fingers inserted in vagina.”

Rainer Wendt, head of the national police union, conceded in an interview that Cologne police commanders committed several errors — beginning with scheduling extra police deployment only for 10 p.m.

But he said there was no way to have foreseen the mass drunkenness and the crowds on the square, which is not the traditional center of celebrations in the city.

“You are always wiser after the fact,” he said. “Last year, the police deployment in Cologne was planned exactly on the same lines, and it was sufficient.”

Video

Ralf Jäger, the interior minister of North Rhine Westphalia, Germany’s most populous state, noted that drink and drugs exacerbated the situation. “After alcohol and drug excesses came the excesses of violence, peaking with people who carried out fantasies of sexual power,” he told state legislators on Monday.

The hope now is that surveillance videos from the police and state railway cameras in the station, from nearby businesses and hotels, and above all from cellphones will help to identify the perpetrators. The police have 135 officers sifting 350 hours of video, they say.

Of 19 suspects so far identified by name by the Cologne police, 10 were asylum seekers and the other nine were believed to be in Germany illegally, according to a report by Mr. Jäger, the interior minister.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

None were registered as living in Cologne, and four are now in custody for robberies committed during the New Year’s events. An additional 32 suspects have been identified by the federal police, including 22 asylum seekers but also three Germans and an American, among others, the report said.

Fully unraveling the Cologne events is expected to take several weeks, however. The police are also examining whether similar events reported from other cities — Hamburg, with over 100 complaints, but also Stuttgart, Frankfurt and Nuremberg — are connected, or even organized.

Holger Münch, the head of the federal criminal police, said Tuesday that “it is not organized crime,” but “what we see here is perpetrators communicating with each other and making arrangements.”

“We must recognize better where they do this, how they do this,” Mr. Münch told RBB Inforadio.

Mr. Wendt, head of the national police union, said that the authorities in Cologne and several other cities were hurriedly revising their deployment plans for carnival, which is celebrated with mass parades and revelry, particularly in cities up and down the Rhine. The main day is Rose Monday, on Feb. 8 this year.

The police and the state government in Mainz, a main carnival center, detailed extra plans this week, including creating special passages to allow women to leave raucous crowds, more bodycams for police officers and steps to explain carnival to newcomers who have never seen such celebrations.

“Unfortunately, in Germany,” Mr. Wendt said, “political decisions are somehow made only after the house is on fire.”