Alison Smale
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/09/world/europe/cologne-new-years-eve-attacks.html
“Everything that happened here must be put on the table,” she said.

The Interior Ministry identified the 31 suspects as nine Algerians, eight Moroccans, four Syrians, five Iranians, an Iraqi, a Serb, an American and two Germans. Most of the crimes they were accused of involved theft and violence, said a ministry spokesman, Tobias Plate, but at least three acts were considered sexual assaults.

The Cologne police chief resigned under pressure on Friday after days in which the authorities struggled to explain why they had not been able to control the violence and why they had been slow to make public the scale and nature of the assaults.

“It is all still incomprehensible,” said Ulrich Karpen, a professor of constitutional and administrative law at the University of Hamburg. “And the effect is that, in the general public, people no longer feel safe.”

It was not clear exactly when the migrants who may have been involved arrived in Germany. But the disclosure added to worries over acculturating hundreds of thousands of people from conservative Muslim societies — many of them young men — who have little experience with open European mores, particularly regarding women.

The challenge of assimilation, while most pronounced for Germany, which has accepted more migrants than any other European country, is not limited to it. Some European countries have begun experimenting with sex education classes to help men adjust to their new cultures.

Reports of sexual assaults, including the case of a woman who narrowly escaped an attack on a Paris-area train by three Afghan refugees, were now proliferating in Germany and other European countries, though it was not clear whether that was because of an increase in attacks or the surge of attention being given to the events in Cologne.

Right-wing politicians have been accused of using the episodes to play on fears of the migrants and to limit their arrivals; liberal-leaning news media and left-wing politicians have been accused of ignoring or playing down a real problem for fear of stigmatizing the new arrivals.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The atmosphere of uncertainty in Germany has only grown, as it has taken the authorities more than a week to begin to unravel events in Cologne amid accusations that they tried to cover up the backgrounds of the perpetrators.

About 100 investigators have been assigned to look into the case, and they are combing through roughly 350 hours of video footage and 250 other items of evidence, a police spokesman said.

Photo

A report by a senior federal police official leaked to some German news media graphically depicted the chaos on Dec. 31 in Cologne, one of Germany’s most mixed cities, saying that police were unable to control the crowds, largely comprising men of Arab or North African appearance.

“At times, it wasn’t even possible to record all of the complaints being lodged,” the report said, as quoted by the online edition of Der Spiegel.

The police were “bombarded with fireworks and pelted with glass bottles.”

According to Der Spiegel, the report quoted one man in the crowd telling police: “I’m a Syrian! You have to treat me kindly! Ms. Merkel invited me.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The unidentified official who wrote the report — it was confirmed as genuine by the Interior Ministry, which declined to comment on its detail — said crowds showed a level of disrespect that “I have never experienced in my 29 years of service.”

The reports underscored the rising political risks for Ms. Merkel, who nevertheless still had a 58 percent approval rating in the latest polls. After a decade in office, she has effectively staked her career on integrating the newcomers and repeatedly refused to cap the influx of immigrants.

But the reported assaults, even she conceded, pose “some very serious questions, which go beyond Cologne.” Among them, whether they were organized, or perpetrated by men with a pronounced contempt for women.

“We must act against this with all decisiveness, because I do not think that these are just isolated cases,” she told reporters in Berlin on Thursday. Ms. Merkel reiterated that “we must continually re-examine whether we really have done everything, as far as expulsion orders and actual expulsions from Germany are concerned.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

She has so far convinced voters and critics from her own conservative ranks that the “welcome culture,” as it is known here, should triumph over fears of assimilating the new arrivals fleeing war and repression or just seeking a better life.

Mr. Karpen, a Cologne native who has long experience of law enforcement in the city-state of Hamburg, said he believed that “the welcome culture is still stronger than those who say, ‘These newcomers are not our people.”’

But, he added, strong signals are needed from Berlin that Ms. Merkel and other leaders are prepared to expel anyone who commits crimes. The government should not hide behind the complexity of German law in this area, he said.

In the wake of the assaults, Ms. Merkel said it was time to ask, “When do you lose your right to stay with us?”

Discussing migrants’ rights to stay in Germany, she added, “We should ask ourselves whether it might be necessary to take this away earlier” than current law allows. “I have to say that, for me, we must take it away sooner.”

“We must do this for us, and for the many refugees who were not present during the events in Cologne,” the chancellor told officials of her party meeting in the southwestern city of Mainz.

Vice Chancellor Sigmar Gabriel, the leader of the Social Democratic Party, which governs the country as part of a “grand coalition” with Ms. Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union, joined calls for expelling migrants convicted of crimes.

“Why should German taxpayers pay to have foreign criminals jailed?” Bild Zeitung quoted Mr. Gabriel as saying. “The threat of having to spend time behind bars in their home country is far more of a deterrent than a prison sentence in Germany.”

But in another example of the complexities of serving justice on foreigners, Interior Minister Thomas de Maizière said, in an interview on Friday, that Germany would not want to deport all convicted criminals to homelands where they might easily avoid detention and “cock their nose” at German justice.