Melissa Eddy
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/06/world/europe/germany-welcomes-migrants-and-refugees.html
That change is at the doorstep. When thousands of migrants were allowed to leave Hungary late Friday and were put on buses to the Austrian border, many were brandishing posters of Chancellor Angela Merkel. In their days of near internment in the inhospitable Hungarian capital, some of the exhausted and desperate travelers broke into chants of “Germany, Germany” and “Merkel, Merkel,” demanding to be allowed to continue their journey west.

Germans have met previous waves — and a steady tide — of these newcomers with an outpouring of generosity and support. Thousands of volunteers have shown up in camps to feed the migrants. Others have delivered water and fruit to refugees to ease their long, hot waits as they register their arrival. And some Germans have even risked arrest to circumvent the immigration bureaucracy and shelter some of the most vulnerable in their churches.

Munich police overseeing the arrival on Monday of trains from Budapest, packed with some 1,300 migrants, were so overwhelmed with public donations that they had to cut off the flow by the next afternoon. As the city prepared for the latest wave on Saturday, those volunteers were incorporated into the authorities’ official response plans.

But some fear the outpouring of generosity will not last. The Social Ministry expects the German government to spend 1.8 billion to 3.3 billion euros, about $2 billion to $3.7 billion, in 2016 to cover the refugees’ basic needs, language lessons and job training. As those costs mount, so might resentment.

Already Germany has experienced a formidable backlash against the migrants — the worst in Europe. Although the country does not have an influential far-right political party, such as France’s National Front or the Freedom Party of Austria, smaller neo-Nazi and right-wing groups have seized on the issue, organizing demonstrations outside homes for asylum seekers. In the first six months of this year, there were more than 200 arson and other attacks on facilities for migrants, and on migrants themselves.

“This massive immigration is increasingly seen in the growing worries of Germans,” said Ronny Zasowk of the far-right National Democratic Party, known by its German initials N.P.D. He warned that social structures would be overwhelmed and said that many of the party’s followers feared that an open-door policy could make Germany more vulnerable to Islamic extremism and terrorism.

Mr. de Maizière, whose office is responsible for coordinating the response to the newcomers, has called for more police, but also for more teachers and social workers to help with, for example, the mounds of paperwork necessary to enter into the bureaucratic system. But in the long-term, he warned, more resources will be needed to help the asylum seekers, many of whom fled chaotic and largely dysfunctional states, to adapt to a new way of life.

Video

Among the strongest voices urging tolerance toward immigrants have been the German news media, from the mass-circulation Bild to the public television stations. Experts point to the news media’s positive stance as crucial in helping the public shift its perception of more foreigners coming to the country.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Recalling Nazi racial laws that singled out the Germanic, or Aryan, people as superior to other ethnicities, leading to the Holocaust and the atrocities of World War II, President Joachim Gauck recently urged Germans to embrace the diversity that has since grown up around them.

Until “even more people can part with the image of a nation that is very homogeneous and in which nearly all people speak German as their mother tongue, are fair-skinned and largely Christian,” he said, their perception of German society will not reflect the reality of who lives here.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“In reality, life as we live it here is already far more diverse,” Mr. Gauck said. “In our heads we know this, but the spirit sometimes lags behind. We as a nation must redefine ourselves, as a collective of different people, but who all accept common values.”

Many, including Ms. Merkel, have compared the challenge facing Germany to the historic decisions after the breach of the Berlin Wall in November 1989, when the leaders of West Germany swiftly enacted measures aimed at ensuring the peaceful merger of what for decades had been two separate states.

Even as the country prepares to mark a quarter-century of German reunification this fall, a spate of violent anti-immigrant protests in the eastern state of Saxony has led to accusations that differences between the two regions still exist, revealing just how difficult it can be even for two peoples who share a language and heritage to feel as one.

Experts also point to the former West Germany’s far less successful experiment of integration in the 1960s, when that country invited men, most of them from Turkey, to fill the industrial jobs in its post-World War II factories. But they were viewed as “guests,” who would eventually return home, not as future citizens.

“For a long time, we made the mistake of considering migrant workers ‘guest workers,’ ” Ms. Merkel recently told reporters, “an idea that we have recently come to abandon, faced with the reality they are our fellow citizens, no matter what their ancestry.”

The descendants of those “guest workers” who remained in the country now make up the nearly four million Muslims in Germany’s population of almost 82 million. But failure to address the workers’ initial needs, and later those of their families, still reverberate. Only this year did the German Parliament pass legislation that would allow children of migrants who were raised or educated in the country to adopt German citizenship, while keeping their own.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Had we worked to integrate them from the beginning, there would be a lot fewer problems today,” said Claudia Walther, a senior project manager with the Bertelsmann Foundation in Germany who has worked on integration.

German leaders see that experience as a moment from which lawmakers can draw valuable lessons as they look ahead to a political summit meeting on Sept. 24 aimed at adopting legal and, possibly, constitutional changes to help the country adapt to the latest influx.

But the Turkish experience is apparently very much on the mind of Mr. de Maizière, who brought it up during the interview with Die Zeit and perhaps provided the starkest insight into the concerns of German leaders as they prepare to accept the thousands heading their way.

“Now we will get hundreds of thousands of Muslims more formed by Arabic background,” he told the weekly. “According to all that I am told by my French colleague, that is a big difference, as far as integration is concerned.”