Melissa Eddy
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/29/world/europe/german-charged-in-attack-on-mayoral-candidate-over-refugee-work.html
Photo

BERLIN — Federal prosecutors charged a 44-year-old German man with attempted murder on Wednesday in the stabbing of a mayoral candidate in Cologne, an attack the authorities said was driven by his anger over her work on the refugee issue.

The attack shocked the country as it grapples with a growing backlash in parts of society against the thousands of migrants flocking here to seek refuge.

The man, who has been identified only as Frank S. in keeping with German laws that protect the identity of a suspect, was charged with attempted murder and dangerous bodily harm in the Oct. 17 stabbing, which severely wounded the candidate, Henriette Reker, who went on to win, and hurt four others. If convicted, he could face life in prison.

The suspect had “sought to send a signal against what he saw as the continually rising number of foreigners in Germany and the political decisions” that led to their presence in the nation, the office of the country’s top prosecutor said in a statement.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“As such, the act is the high point in a whole line of intimidation and threats against people engaged in assisting refugees and taking them in to Germany,” it said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Uwe Schlosser, the federal prosecutor, took over the case from state prosecutors in Cologne on grounds of the particularly dangerous nature of the stabbing, which came against the backdrop of a rising tide of attacks by the extreme right or neo-Nazis on accommodation for refugees.