Somini Sengupta
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/12/world/europe/europe-banks-on-incentives-and-persuasion-to-keep-migrants-home.html
On Wednesday, African and European leaders neared agreement on a plan that includes the promise of “a tailor-made package of support” for countries that cooperate with the European Union and take their failed asylum seekers back.

Schengen Area countries do not require passports or controls between their common borders. Routes commonly used by refugees 2014-15 EUROPE ASIA SCHENGEN AREA AND ASSOCIATE COUNTRIES Sid SERBIA AFGHANISTAN MIDEAST NORTH AFRICA BANGLADESH Bay of Bengal WEST AFRICA Routes commonly used by refugees 2014-15 EUROPE SCHENGEN AREA AND ASSOCIATE COUNTRIES Sid SERBIA MIDEAST NORTH AFRICA WEST AFRICA

Yet for the migrants and the countries they come from, the incentives may not be enough to compete with the billions of dollars that workers send back to their families — and thus the economies of their home nations. The World Bank expects the nations of sub-Saharan Africa to receive about $33 billion in remittances this year alone, compared with nearly $47 billion in aid from nations around the world.

The deal includes a 1.8 billion euro fund (roughly $2 billion) for African countries from which migrants originate. In an effort to make it more palatable to Africans themselves, it also promises to double the number of university scholarships for African students and to offer new training opportunities for African entrepreneurs.

The European Union’s top diplomat at the United Nations, João Vale de Almeida, said that the deal being proposed was one that African leaders should embrace.

“It is in their interest that we organize a joint response to the challenge,” he said in an interview. “The alternative, if they don’t engage themselves as well, is we find ourselves in a situation where you would find very little, very little support for any kind of migration.”

“It’s asking them to help us make that flow a politically sustainable operation,” he added.

The sweeteners come on top of more punitive measures that Europe has already put into motion in an effort to stop the flow. There are fences along the border of Morocco and the Spanish city of Melilla, and joint maritime patrols along the Atlantic. More recently, European militaries have been authorized to patrol the international waters of the Mediterranean to inspect and seize boats suspected of human smuggling that depart from Libya.

Critics liken those efforts to draining sand out of the Sahara.

For one thing, Europe makes it virtually impossible for Africans to live and work in Europe legally, giving them few options other than the illegal, often dangerous, route.

Video

Amnesty International on Tuesday issued a scathing critique of the Valletta plan, saying that “concrete proposals on safe and legal routes are glaringly absent” and worrying that asylum seekers might also be sent back without due process.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Senegal’s president, Macky Sall, made it clear that accepting returned migrants “is a difficult subject” for his continent. “We have people who have often taken chances with their lives in terrible conditions, who have crossed deserts and the Mediterranean,” and there have been “thousands of deaths,” Mr. Sall told reporters Wednesday in Valletta.

“We have to have a frank discussion,” said Mr. Sall, who emphasized that there also needed to be a focus on allowing Africans to stay in Europe.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Charity, said Gita Honwana Welch, an associate fellow at Chatham House, a London-based policy research group, is not going to be enough. Many African economies, including those from which the migrants come, are growing fast, she pointed out, but doing little to create decent jobs for young citizens who aspire to a better life.

“Africa boasts incredible growth rates, but what it really needs is inclusive growth,” she wrote in a blog post on the Chatham House website. “In its absence, European authorities cannot hope to control illegal migration.”

The summit meeting itself hints at the vast gulf between the two continents on how to tackle migration. For Europe, keeping out economic migrants is an urgent political priority. For Africa, the exodus of young, ambitious men is potentially a political relief valve and an economic lift. It not only brings in cash, but also provides an exit route for frustrated young men who, as a recent report by the International Crisis Group notes, have no decent job prospects nor “real loyalty to the state.”

European Refugee and Migrant Crisis

“Many youths see migration — illegal if necessary — as their only future,” the report says.

European capitals have historically had little success in sending home failed asylum seekers. A small share of them agree to return voluntarily, usually with a package of cash incentives facilitated by the International Organization for Migration. Most remain in Europe in the shadows.

Now, with the surge of Syrian and other refugees from war, whom Europe is obliged to take, the continent’s leaders are under intense pressure to draw a clear line against those who have no such legal protections — and to send them back home.

Drawing such a clear line may not be easy. According to figures from the migration organization, of the 141,000 people estimated to have crossed the Mediterranean from Libya to Italy so far this year, the largest single group is from Eritrea, one of the most repressive countries in the world. Others come from Nigeria, Mali and Sudan, countries torn by conflict as well.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The aid money that the European Union is expected to announce in Valletta this week — some of the €1.8 billion over the next several years is repackaged aid that Europe had already promised — is intended to spur economic opportunities in the migrants’ home countries, including vocational training. But the money is also meant to be used for what the draft action plan calls “migration management, including containing and preventing irregular migration.”

Mr. Loprete, the migration organization’s director in Niger, took pains to point out that his center, which is financed by European donors, does not force anyone to return. It seeks instead, he said, to inform the migrants of the real risks that lie ahead — including getting stuck in Libya for months, which is what often happens — and to give them reasons to stay in the region. In the past, migrants returning home were sometimes offered a sewing machine to start a new business, or aid workers would help build water wells in their arid villages.

His agency is now hoping to arm migrants with skills to make a better living closer to home — hence the school to teach them how to make bricks with sand and plastic.

“They have sand everywhere,” he said. “Unfortunately they have plastic everywhere,” too.

Mr. Loprete is keenly aware that it is not easy to talk someone out of following a dream. Not long ago, he said, he met a young man who was trying to get on a boat to Italy. It was his sixth try.