Melissa Eddy
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/07/world/europe/cologne-mayor-henriette-reker-germany-sexual-assaults.html
The nature and scale of the assaults have shocked Germany and brought to the surface social tensions over the willingness of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government to throw open the doors to more than one million refugees last year.

Ms. Reker, who was elected last year, had already become a symbol of that embrace after being stabbed at a campaign event by a man angered over her welcoming attitude toward refugees. Her remarks have now made her a target of derision all along the political spectrum.

Hundreds of women and men took to social media, posting angry responses and memes — including dozens showing the outstretched right arm known as the “Hitler Greeting” — under the hashtag #einearmlaenge, German for “an arm’s length.”

Even the country’s justice minister pushed back against the statement. “I don’t think much of tips for behavior for women, such as ‘an arm’s length,’ ” Heiko Maas wrote on Twitter. “Not women are responsible, but the perpetrators.”

The police have so far been unable to apprehend anyone, a fact that Wolfgang Albers, Cologne’s chief of police, attributed to the chaos in which the assaults took place, despite there being dozens of officers on duty in the area.

“The women were in a very difficult situation,” Chief Albers said in an interview Wednesday with the public radio station WDR 5. “They were afraid, they wanted to get away, and of course they did not notice any specific faces.”

In Hamburg, the police said Wednesday that they had received 53 complaints, more than half of them alleging sexual harassment, from victims age 18 to 25. They appear to have been targeted in a similar fashion in that city’s Reeperbahn red-light and club district on New Year’s Eve. Victims and witnesses in Hamburg also described the attackers as being dark-skinned or “looking Arabic.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Although the authorities have offered no concrete evidence that the attackers were among the hundreds of thousands of people who have poured into the country since mid-August, the incidents have laid bare the challenges Germans face in integrating young men from more conservative societies into their liberal, Western democracy.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The mayor’s remarks also reignited a debate about casual sexism in German society. In 2013, Rainer Brüderle, a leader with the Free Democratic Party, came under fire for suggesting that a journalist could “fill out a dirndl,” touching a nerve particularly among professional women who say that relations between men and women are surprisingly backward for a developed country.

Last year, Parliament passed a disputed quota law requiring leading companies to give at least 30 percent of the seats on their supervisory boards to women.

Christine Kronenberg, Cologne’s commissioner for women’s affairs, who attended a meeting Tuesday called by Ms. Reker, said the mayor’s comments were “unfortunate.” She said they did not reflect her attitude toward women, or the victims.

“Sexual assaults are aimed at humiliating women and an expression of a male desire for power,” Ms. Kronenberg said in a telephone interview. “Until now, we have encouraged women to defend themselves through resistance tactics, but these are all aimed at individual attackers.”

The New Year’s Eve mass-scale assaults, the police said, involved groups of several men taking advantage of the crowds to target young women by surrounding them. While several perpetrators groped the women, others picked their pockets, stealing wallets and cellphones.

“This is a new phenomenon of a dimension that we have never been able to imagine before,” Ms. Kronenberg said. “We now have to consider, together with police, new suggestions for how women can defend themselves in such situations.”

Even if the authorities are able to apprehend suspects, they biggest challenge will be for victims to identify their attackers, given that several men appeared to have been involved in the attacks on each woman.

“It will be very difficult because it took place in a very crowded situation where many people were pushing to get in,” Chief Albers said. “And this situation was used by the perpetrators to carry out this horrible crime.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

New Year’s Eve is one night when Germans are allowed to set off fireworks in public places, meaning the dark streets are also clouded with smoke and people who are trying to skirt the sparks, leading to chaotic scenes.

Witnesses who were near the city’s main train station, where the assaults took place, described the scene as threatening. Shortly before midnight, the police cleared people from a public square outside the station in an effort to calm what had become a dangerous situation, with people throwing large fireworks into crowds. Driven into the crowds, groups of young men began encircling young women.

Two-thirds of the 106 complaints filed with the police came from people who lived not in Cologne but in the densely populated surrounding metro area, and did not come in until Friday morning, Chief Albers said.

He said many of the complaints lacked detailed descriptions of the perpetrators, which has hampered efforts to apprehend suspects.