Jim Yardley
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/15/world/europe/after-europe-and-turkey-strike-a-deal-fears-grow-that-migrants-will-turn-to-italy.html
But then smugglers discovered routes from the Turkish coastline to Greek islands such as Lesbos and Chios. Many Syrians and Afghans who had been trying to reach Italy quickly shifted to this more convenient journey. During the final six months of last year more than 780,000 people went through Turkey into Greece, and then through the Balkans toward Germany and Sweden, until Balkan countries and others began erecting fences to block their passage.

Now Austrian leaders are concerned that as many as 300,000 migrants could arrive in Italy this year and attempt to move north. In response, the Austrian defense minister, Hans Peter Doskozil, announced this week that the country would introduce tougher border controls at the crucial Brenner Pass, the alpine crossing to Italy that is one of Europe’s most important north-south corridors.

European Refugee and Migrant Crisis

Mr. Doskozil said that the new controls would take effect on June 1, and has suggested that Austria may build fencing similar to the controls the country erected along its border with Slovenia. Italian leaders have expressed serious concerns and sent a letter to the European migration commissioner asking his office to “verify with extreme urgency” whether the Austrian plans violated Europe’s Schengen agreement on open internal borders.

Beyond the negative impact on trade and shipping, tightening controls at the Brenner Pass could also bottle up migrants inside Italy.

“There is a risk that Europe will die here,” Arno Kompatscher, the president of the Italian autonomous province of Alto Adige, which borders Austria, told the Italian newspaper La Repubblica this week. “The Brenner is the symbol of European unification, of 70 years of peace and social and economic well-being. If we devalue that symbol, if we return to the idea of small states, everything will change.”

Photo

Hundreds of miles to the south, in Sicily, aid workers and Italian officials are preparing for a busy summer as the warmer weather and calmer seas of springtime have already arrived. The latest rescues came on Tuesday, when 17 migrant ships bearing 2,150 people were intercepted at sea.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Adm. Nicola De Felice, who oversees the Italian Navy’s operations in Sicily, said that for now the biggest problem was the lack of a stable government in Libya. Smugglers can operate with little impediment, even as the Islamic State controls part of the Libyan coastline, barely 300 miles across the sea from Italy.

“The situation there is very confused,” Admiral De Felice said in an interview. “That could create problems, both in lacking any controls over the migrant influx, and to the terrorist threat. We don’t know what is happening in Libya.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Migrants who have reached Sicily describe a chaotic situation in Libya that has only worsened in recent years. Many of the migrants are sub-Saharan Africans who had been working in Libya before the country destabilized, or who are passing through to reach Europe. Many are fleeing political persecution in countries like Ivory Coast, Gambia and Mali. Or, in some cases, they are fleeing persecution for being gay.

The most striking change this year is the sharp rise in the number of unaccompanied minors. Nearly 2,700 of the 19,000 arrivals in Italy through the end of March were under 18, and traveling alone. One 17-year-old Malian, Ibrahim, who was rescued at sea on Feb. 22, had gunshot wounds. He said he was shot through the arm, back and thigh as he fled a Libyan prison.

He had originally left Mali at the end of 2012, after his father decided to take a second wife and cast him out, along with his mother. Needing to earn money, Ibrahim spent two years herding goats near the Algerian border and eventually went to Libya, where the police harassed and imprisoned him. He was shot during his escape and a man who helped him insisted that he depart immediately on a smuggler boat, rather than be hospitalized.

“There are lots of other boys waiting in Libya to come here,” Ibrahim said during an interview at the center in Messina. “Some are working jobs there so they can come here. I want to stay here for my future. Italy saved my life. I can’t go anywhere else.”

Aid workers say such stories are commonplace. Another minor, Karim, 17, fled his native Ivory Coast after his family became entangled in the de facto civil war there last year. “First of all, I want to feel safe,” Karim said, explaining why he came to Italy. “When I was home, I never felt safe. I want to go to school and play soccer.”