Tim Arango
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/25/world/europe/turkeys-crackdown-on-critics-of-erdogan-snares-dutch-journalist.html
Late Friday, Ms. Merkel reacted for the first time to criticism of how she had handled the affair. She defended her decision to allow further investigation by prosecutors, but said she regretted saying she shared the view of the Turkish authorities that the poem was offensive. “Looking back, that was a mistake,” she said. “The impression arose that freedom of opinion and freedom of the press were not important. They are important to me and will remain so.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In a further embarrassment to European leaders, a Turkish consular official in Rotterdam, in the Netherlands, asked Turks in the country last week to report any insults directed at Mr. Erdogan. Ms. Umar, who has dual Dutch and Turkish citizenship, wrote a column in the newspaper Metro that took aim at that request. In the column, she called Mr. Erdogan “the most megalomaniac dictator since the foundation of the republic in 1923.” She addressed the column to “every Dutch-Turk who supports this call by the consulate and thinks they can act as traitors by snitching on what Dutch people say about ‘sultan’ Erdogan.”

Prime Minister Mark Rutte of the Netherlands said on Twitter on Sunday that he had spoken with Ms. Umar by phone, and emphasized that the Foreign Ministry was working to assist her.

Turkey, under the famously thin-skinned Mr. Erdogan, has for years silenced domestic voices that have been critical of the government, but lately has taken aim at foreign journalists as well. The Istanbul correspondent for the German publication Der Spiegel was effectively expelled from the country this year after his press accreditation was not renewed. And last week, a German television correspondent was denied entry to the country.

It is one thing for Europe to look past these issues now, but as part of the agreement on containing the migrant crisis, European leaders agreed to speed up Turkey’s lapsed negotiations to join the European Union. The fundamental disagreement over freedom of expression is likely to be central to those negotiations if they ever resume in earnest.

A statement released Sunday by the Dutch Foreign Ministry said: “Freedom of speech and freedom of the press is a fundamental right. An E.U. candidate member state should honor such rights.”

On Saturday evening, after visiting a refugee camp near Gaziantep, a Turkish city near the Syrian border, Ms. Merkel and Mr. Tusk joined the Turkish prime minister, Ahmet Davutoglu, at a news conference.

Mr. Tusk, a former prime minister of Poland, who was once imprisoned there before the fall of Communism, noted that Mr. Erdogan, too, had once been jailed for his views. In 1999, Mr. Erdogan, an Islamist, was jailed by Turkey’s secular government for reciting a religious poem.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Tusk, in comments directed at Mr. Erdogan, said, “My idea on this is that I learned and accepted to be thick-skinned as a politician.”