Jeffrey Marcus
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/01/world/europe/an-escalating-migrant-crisis-and-an-intensifying-search-for-solutions.html
Some member countries have tried to stop migrants from entering: Hungary is building a wall along its southern border with Serbia. Other member states have said they are opting out of certain Dublin rules to better handle the influx or are implementing security measures under the open-border policy to manage or slow the arrival of migrants.

Q. How can migrants move from country to country?

A. They can effectively do this under the Schengen Agreement, which allows for the free movement of people between most European Union member states, as well as several countries that are not part of the union.

The agreement dismantled border controls, allowing residents and foreigners who had entered one country to travel freely without further border checks. It has been praised by the European Commission as “one of the greatest achievements of the E.U.”

But some European leaders have begun to question whether the union can sustain the complete lack of border controls under the crush of hundreds of thousands of migrants who require food, shelter and other basic services.

The fear of terrorist attacks, like the one attempted on a train from Amsterdam to Paris on Aug. 21, has also raised concerns that open borders make it easier for would-be attackers to slip by the authorities.

On Sunday, Austria began stopping vehicles at its border with Hungary, saying it was trying to catch smugglers after the deaths of 71 migrants whose decomposing bodies were found in a truck on a highway southeast of Vienna last week.

The Schengen Agreement allows member countries to establish temporary border controls to maintain public order or ensure national security. The controls have been used in the past to keep soccer hooligans from traveling to games and after terrorist attacks to maintain security.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Q. What does the European Union plan to do?

A. Ministers from union countries will meet in Brussels in September to decide on measures to better deal with the flow of migrants.

The meeting of interior and justice ministers, scheduled for Sept. 14, was called on Sunday amid increasing pressure on the union after the deaths of the 71 migrants.

After thousands have died trying to make the journey across the Mediterranean to southern Europe, fewer migrants are using the dangerous sea passage. More now opt for an overland route through the Balkans. The United Nations estimates that 3,000 migrants a day are pouring into the Balkans and heading to other destinations in Europe.

The burden for taking in these people has been unevenly distributed, with Germany taking in the most migrants — a projected 800,000 this year — while Hungary, Sweden and tiny Montenegro have accepted the most per capita.

Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany warned on Monday that unless all European Union members agreed to take in a fair proportion of asylum seekers, Europe’s open border policy would be under threat.

Germany’s neighbors are reluctant. The leaders of the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland and Hungary are scheduled to meet ahead of the European Union ministers’ meeting to oppose any quotas on accepting migrants.