Alison Smale, Victor Homola
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/15/world/europe/merkel-defies-conservative-critics-of-her-refugee-policy.html
Video

BERLIN — With maneuvering behind the scenes and a strong appeal to various factions in her party, Chancellor Angela Merkel on Monday muted conservative criticism of opening Germany to an estimated one million refugees this year and insisted that Germans would succeed in absorbing the intake “because it is part of the identity of this country to do great things.”

Ms. Merkel, who recently marked a decade in power, had come under fire from several blocs in her Christian Democratic Union for refusing to put a cap on the number of new arrivals. But at a party meeting, she deflected her opponents by promising that the number would drop and that refugees had to respect German law and customs.

On Sunday, she agreed to adapt a party resolution to reflect the concerns of the conservatives. That resolution was adopted late Monday with two votes against and a few abstentions.

The chancellor pleaded in a 73-minute speech for Germans to recognize that “it is not human masses that are coming to us, but individual human beings.” She also lauded the civic effort to welcome the refugees as “the best and most convincing answer to all those who try, with hatred and incitement in their hearts, to whip up sentiment against strangers.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“In the 21st century,” Ms. Merkel said, “cutting oneself off is not a rational option.”

Delegates responded with a nine-minute standing ovation.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Ms. Merkel also reiterated her belief that multiculturalism “leads to parallel societies” rather than integration and is therefore “a sham.”