Barbara Surk, Stephen Castle
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/18/world/europe/hungary-closes-border-changing-refugees-path.html
With no end in sight to the war in Syria, winter approaching and fears growing that European nations may become less receptive to migrants, thousands have elected to make the risky journey now, while it remains possible.

On Saturday about 600 refugees, mostly Syrians with some Afghans and Iranians, entered Slovenia from Croatia, and were taken to the Austrian frontier at Spielfeld; there, Slovenian police walked groups of them across the border every two hours into Austria, officials said.

In Slovenia, an interior ministry official, Bostjan Sefic, said that 1,800 refugees will be registered at its border with Croatia on Saturday, and most would be taken to reception centers to spend the night.

Mr. Sefic said that Slovenia, which has a population of two million, could process up to 2,500 people a day, and wants to keep the flow at this level to manage it smoothly and efficiently.

But besides worries about Slovenia’s capacity to deal with the movement of migrants, there are also fears about Austria’s ability to cope. Before Hungary closed its Croatian border at midnight Friday, 4,800 migrants who were already in transit arrived in Nickelsdorf, Austria, on Friday from Hungary, while an additional 3,500 were expected to arrive by late Saturday. More were expected on the coming days.

In the last month, 200,000 migrants had passed through Croatia, and almost all had then moved on to Hungary, toward Austria, and then Germany and other welcoming countries to the west and north, migration officials said.

At Slovenia’s border with Austria, Syrians, and other migrants appeared acutely aware of stricter border controls in Austria and Germany in recent days. Many fear that they will get marooned in a Balkan country for days or weeks, or even find that Europe closes the door completely before they can reach Germany or other countries further north.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We wanted to get a visa from the embassy and travel properly, by plane. But it’s not possible,” said Latifa Shaab, a 21-year-old student from the Syrian city of Homs, who had traveled through Turkey, boarded a dinghy that landed in Greece, and made her way through Macedonia, Serbia and Croatia, hoping to reach Sweden.

“From all we heard on the news, this was our last chance to reach Europe, so we left in a hurry,” she said, as she got off the first bus that pulled into Sentlij border crossing between Slovenia and Austria about midday Saturday.

European Refugee and Migrant Crisis

After a half-hour’s rest, and a meal of apples, bread, butter, jam, and chocolate milk for the children, the Slovenian police lined up a group of about 150 people and walked them into Austria, about 700 yards away.

On the Austrian side of the crossing, officers were directing the group, barking over loudspeakers at migrants to form a line.

Hani al-Karaa, a 24-year-old Syrian from the southern city of Dara’a, said he thought that the borders would close sooner or later, just like they did in Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“It was now or never,” he said. “So I decided to go before the window of opportunity closes.”

Hungary decided to shut its border with Croatia after it said it was disappointed at the outcome of a meeting of European Union leaders to discuss the migrant crisis. That ended with the outline of an agreement for Turkey, designed to encourage more migrants to remain there, rather than traveling on to western Europe. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, is expected to hold further talks on Sunday to try to reach a deal with Turkey’s leaders, Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

On Saturday Croatia’s interior minister, Ranko Ostojic, predicted that Hungary’s border closure would not reduce the number of people arriving, and added that “nobody can stop this flow without shooting.” Were Austria or Germany to close their borders, it would produce a “domino effect and lot of troubles for all countries,” he said, according to The Associated Press.

There was another grim reminder of the risks taken by migrants when the Greek coast guard said that three girls, ages 5, 9 and 16, and a 2-year-old boy had drowned after their vessel sank off the small island of Kalolimnos, in the southeastern Aegean Sea, adding to the almost daily death toll from the region. A woman, a man and a 9-year-old boy are missing at sea, The A.P. reported.

In Germany there were signs of increased tensions stirred by the crisis when, Henriette Reker, an independent candidate running for mayor of Cologne, was stabbed in the neck and severely wounded in an attack that the police said appeared to be motivated by her support for refugees. In southern Sweden a disused school that was expected to house refugees was destroyed in a suspected arson attack.