Rick Lyman
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/01/world/europe/in-vienna-trains-packed-with-migrants-are-welcomed-and-ushered-on.html
The Viennese who assembled to greet the newcomers brought shopping carts and boxes full of bottled water, bread, diapers, cookies, fruit and candy.

“They have been traveling so long and must be very hungry and they have been treated so shabbily,” said Marlene Pramhas, a social worker. She and two friends brought as many loaves of bread as they could carry to the train station, where “it is more or less chaos,” she said.

“We felt we had to do something,” Ms. Pramhas said. “It’s a small thing but maybe it will help.”

When the doors of one train from Budapest opened, a stream of people poured off, many clutching bags of clothing and other possessions. There were children screaming as cameras flashed and several people on the station platform waved and called out, “Hi! Welcome!”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Most of the people disembarking from the train headed straight across the platform to Track 8 where a train to Salzburg, near the border with Germany, was waiting to leave. Hundreds of passengers intent on pressing on piled onto the train, filling the seats, then the aisles.

There was shouting and shoving and a few angry arguments. There seemed to be no question of tickets, the determined passengers just got on the train.

The local authorities may not have forced them onto the train, but they made it as easy as possible for the migrants to pass through Vienna as quickly as possible.

When the second-class cars were crammed to capacity, the first-class seats were opened to several dozen people still clustered on the platform. Those cars, too, quickly filled.

One weeping boy was separated from his family. Fellow travelers held him aloft as he screamed “Mama! Mama!” with tears streaming down his cheeks. Finally, a man emerged from one of the cars and scooped the terrified boy into his arms to another round of applause while dozens of onlookers recorded the scene on their cellphones.