Melissa Eddy
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/01/world/europe/germany-migrants-merkel.html
“Europe as a whole must move,” Ms. Merkel said, warning that failing to do so would weaken the agreements that had led to the elimination of border controls and an increase in freedom of movement through much of the Continent over the past 20 years, under what is known as the Schengen agreement.

“If we don’t succeed in fairly distributing refugees then of course the Schengen question will be on the agenda for many,” Ms. Merkel said.

With increasing numbers hoping to come to Germany, lured by the stability and job prospects offered by Europe’s largest economy, Ms. Merkel urged Germans to look at the situation in the context of the country’s history.

“The world sees Germany as a country of hope and opportunity, that was not always the case,” Ms. Merkel said, reminding Germans that they could be proud of a postwar country based on the principles of dignity, human rights and the right to political asylum.

Ms. Merkel said her government was planning measures in the coming months aimed at coordinating efforts between communities, states and the federal government, which each carry different responsibilities in welcoming, processing and integrating those who are granted the right to remain in the country as refugees.

Ms. Merkel praised the thousands of Germans who had opened their homes and pocketbooks to the newcomers and who had donated their time. “There is no tolerance for those who question the dignity of other people,” she said, echoing comments she made last week at a reception center for asylum seekers in the eastern German city of Heidenau that had been the site of violent protests.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Germany needs to be able to process applications more swiftly, and language and elementary-school teachers are needed to help families adapt — in Berlin alone, 400 new classes of students will be starting the new school year, the chancellor said.

Germany must also overcome logistical hurdles like the cumbersome bureaucracy needed to construct shelters at a rapid enough pace, she said, pointing out the country lacks a fire safety ordinance for tents. Ms. Merkel said her government would address issues like those in a law that she hoped would be passed before the end of the year.

“German thoroughness is super, but right now what we need is German flexibility,” Ms. Merkel said, recalling the government’s swift reaction to the global banking crisis of 2008, the ability to respond to natural disasters and, 25 years ago, the reunification of East and West Germany.