Scott Sayare
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/20/world/europe/after-toulouse-killings-an-areas-anger-runs-deep.html
“These youth, they feel humiliated,” said Ms. Ibn Ziaten, herself an immigrant from Morocco. They are treated as North Africans in France, she said, and as French in North Africa. “They don’t know where their place is,” she said. Nor did Mr. Merah.

“He took what was dearest to me; he took my son, my friend, my prince,” Ms. Ibn Ziaten said. “But he was a victim of society.”

Other residents of this depressed place say the same, though most do not celebrate Mr. Merah’s crimes. He committed the unconscionable, they say, but he was one of them, shaped by the same forces of rejection and discrimination that they say they know and resent. They understand, to a degree, and they will not denounce him.

To much of France, Mr. Merah was a terrorist, a determined killer who reviled this country, who set out for Afghanistan and Pakistan for training in jihad. In Les Izards he was, and remains, simply Mohammed. The gap between those images, both true but neither complete, seems only to have deepened the sense of alienation in the neighborhood.

“We’re still a bit in shock,” said Frédéric Mercadal, 37, who heads the local soccer club and knew Mr. Merah well. He had his troubles, Mr. Mercadal said, and was frequently childish and needy. But he could also be “courteous and kind,” even “filled with joie de vivre.”

Like Mr. Merah, many local youths identify with the Palestinian cause, said Younouss Zeroual, 17, whose closely trimmed black hair peaks in a meticulous ridge. During his standoff with the police, Mr. Merah told negotiators that he had targeted soldiers who were fighting Muslims in Afghanistan — like Ms. Ibn Ziaten’s son — and then chose to shoot Jews, when a separate target failed to appear, to avenge Palestinian deaths.

“Everyone says he was wrong,” Mr. Zeroual said. “But they understand the message he wanted to get across.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Still, Mr. Zeroual said he believed Mr. Merah was perhaps framed by the government. As an Arab, he had “the look of a criminal” in the eyes of the state, Mr. Zeroual said. Witness descriptions of the killer did not match Mr. Merah, he said.

Lakhdar Chadli, 25, who used to play soccer with Mr. Merah, added, “We didn’t see his body.”

There is ambivalence, even pride, in his crimes. Some young men seem to enjoy the horror they can provoke by calling him a hero, residents and social workers said. Some surely believe he is.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“We’re trying not to talk about it, to move on to something else,” said a local social worker, requesting that his name be withheld. When he has tried to engage young people about Mr. Merah, they have responded only by calling him a “god.” “You can’t have a real exchange.”

In his violence, Mr. Merah has left the area feeling under siege, too, residents say, from the police and the news media, which descended en masse after the killings, and from politicians who have made Les Izards a watchword for violence and hate. In response, there has been a sort of closing of ranks. Residents discuss Mr. Merah among themselves, they say, but consider it a betrayal to discuss him with outsiders.

“I think the neighborhood has had enough of being stigmatized,” said Martine Croquette, a deputy mayor in Toulouse.

There were problems here well before the killings. The drug trade has flourished in the past decade, the authorities say, mostly hashish but also cocaine and heroin. Lookouts slump on chairs outside the entry halls at the northeast corner of the Cité des Izards, the dilapidated five-story housing complex at the center of the neighborhood. Wary dealers conduct identity checks, as if they were members of a plainclothes police force.

The housing complex is next to a square where buses stop and the subway lets out. There is a post office, a welfare office and a library, and across the way is a pharmacy. There is a small Muslim prayer room and a municipal activity center. There is little else.

The neighborhood is small, with about 4,000 residents, mostly Arabs from North Africa or their children. Many are observant Muslims. About half the youths are unemployed.

Residents “know they’re marginalized, they know people don’t give a damn about them,” said a local businessman and Muslim organizer, requesting anonymity for fear of local reaction. Children are urged into vocational schools instead of universities, he said. Young men say they are turned away from nightclubs because they are Arab.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Residents complain that when potential employers see their postal code, 31200, they are immediately disqualified. Many young men here “go bad in reaction,” said a local woman, a retired nurse, who asked not to be quoted by name. Some turn to the drug trade, others to Islam, though the few radical currents that exist in Toulouse have little hold here, residents say.

There are occasional concerts, though, a weekly open-air market, the library. “It’s the projects,” the woman said, but the neighborhood can also be “pleasant to live in.”

The killings have accelerated plans for an urban renovation program here, an investment of about $25 million from the City of Toulouse. The central government recently designated the area for additional law enforcement resources, though many residents do not feel kindly toward the police.

Two days after police commandos killed Mr. Merah in a raid in March, a gray Peugeot sedan rolled to a stop before a cluster of young men in Les Izards. A plainclothes police officer in the passenger seat held his hands to the window, residents recalled, gesturing in celebration of his colleagues’ bloody handiwork: 1-0.

The officer, despised in the neighborhood since well before that episode, still patrols there.