Dan Bilefsky, Jim Yardley
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/23/world/europe/europe-italy-migrants.html
Photo

LONDON — On the eve of an emergency summit meeting to address Europe’s spiraling migration crisis, Prime Minister Matteo Renzi of Italy on Wednesday issued a plea for collective action, and he alluded to a call for the creation of centers in Africa that would process asylum applications in a bid to spare many the perilous sea crossing to Europe.

Italy has become the main target of a wave of migrants trying to cross the Mediterranean Sea on often unseaworthy vessels such as the ship that capsized off the coast of Libya over the weekend, killing as many as 900 people. A steady stream of boats has been arriving daily to its shores, confronting the country and the European Union with a humanitarian crisis.

Video

“Either we have policies,” he told the lower house of Italy’s Parliament, “or we go nowhere.”

He added, “We are asking Europe to be Europe, not just when it’s time to devise a budget.”

Mr. Renzi called for the European Union to have a more coordinated strategy, including expanding search-and-rescue patrols and taking action against smugglers in Libya and elsewhere, whom he referred to as “21st-century slave drivers.”

Photo

He also evoked an idea that has previously circulated in Brussels: the establishment of migration centers in African countries, in cooperation with the United Nations, so that would-be migrants could apply for asylum in the European Union from their home countries rather than set off on potentially deadly journeys in search of refuge in Europe.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On Thursday, European leaders are expected to discuss proposals to double the size of search-and-rescue operations in the Mediterranean; increase the budget for Frontex, the European Union’s border agency; improve cooperation between the police across the bloc; and intensify the battle against smugglers and human traffickers.

European Union officials said on Wednesday that the current budget for the bloc’s border protection operation, known as Triton, was about 3 million euros, or $3.2 million, a month, and that the operation’s resources included two aircraft, two helicopters, six coastal patrol vessels and about 65 officers. Even doubling that would probably not be enough to deal with the scale of the migration crisis, analysts said.