Tim Arango
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/20/world/europe/migrants-lament-as-deal-with-turkey-closes-door-to-europe.html
Just then, a Turkish man, presumably a smuggler’s agent, approached and said, “It’s time to go,” and they were off.

By the next afternoon, they had returned to Izmir, their European dreams dashed, after being interdicted by the Turkish authorities. As of Saturday afternoon, worries of a mass exodus of refugees crossing the choppy Aegean Sea from Turkey to Greece had not materialized.

Many have tried, though, and some said they would make one last effort on Saturday night. Turkish authorities said that a large-scale operation, involving the coast guard, the police and the military, including the use of helicopters, had resulted in the detention of 1,734 migrants and 16 smugglers on Friday along the Aegean coast.

While many migrants were seized at beaches or on the sea, others were rounded up from hotels and streets and taken in for questioning to determine their backgrounds, nationalities and plans to travel to Europe, according to a statement from the Turkish military.

For Europe, the deal with Turkey offers its best chance to contain a crisis that has roiled the Continent, and upended its politics amid a surge in popularity of anti-immigration parties. For Turkey, the deal offered the prospect of resuming talks to join the European Union, billions of dollars in aid and visa-free travel for Turks.

For Syrians, though, as well as Iraqis, Afghans and other refugees from countries in chaos, who saw Europe as their last, best hope, the pact was disheartening.

For them, there is a sense that Europe, so welcoming last summer, is betraying them, and that Turkey is benefiting on the backs of their misery.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s a good deal for Turkey, but it harms the Syrian people,” said Issi Adam, 30, from Aleppo, who had tried to reach Europe a few nights ago but was sent back before he even reached the beach.

As Mr. Adam stood outside a mosque close to midnight on Friday, he pointed to the men sleeping on the ground, just behind him.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“People are sleeping outside,” he said. “During the day, you see hundreds of people waiting for food.”

He continued: “We had one door only, the European door. And now it’s shut down.”

The Basmane neighborhood of this city, a warren of narrow streets, tourist hotels and cafes, was a vibrant hub last summer for migrant smuggling. But in recent weeks and months, as the Turks began cracking down on smuggling rings and migrants, either on land or at sea, business dropped noticeably.

On a rainy Saturday afternoon, it was mostly quiet, with little evidence of the bustling migrant economy of last summer. Many Syrians, instead of becoming migrants, have stayed here to find work.

Hamoud Ali, a Syrian who works at a clothing shop, also sells orange life jackets to migrants. He said at the height of the migrant rush, last summer, he would sell 150 jackets on a good day. Now, he said, he sells 10 to 15, at most.

“Yesterday, no one made it to Greece,” he said on Saturday.

Many said they believed that the pact between Europe and Turkey would not solve the problem, and that eventually migrants and the smugglers — many of whom are connected with Turkish organized crime rings — would find alternative routes.

Even so, many Syrians who had once hoped to leave are now being forced to contemplate a long-term future in Turkey. Turkey, which has seen war resume in the southeast with Kurdish rebels, has also faced attacks by the Islamic State. On Saturday morning, a suicide bomber struck in the heart of Istanbul’s most famous pedestrian shopping street, killing four people and wounding dozens of others.

For Syrians, the hope now is that Turkey will use the $6.8 billion in aid being provided by Europe to improve their lives.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“If they want to block them from going, then they should give them aid and money from Europe,” said Muhammed Othman, 27, a Syrian who works at a sandwich shop here, and said that as long as he had a job he would prefer to stay in Turkey. He pointed across the street to the mosque, where food aid is distributed, and said, “We see people lining up to get milk for their babies.”

While some here were still planning a last dash on Saturday night, hoping to reach Greece before midnight, others had given up hope.

Muhammed Ali, a Syrian who works as a smuggler’s broker, arranging trips for refugees from street corners and hotel lobbies, said that a trip he had set up Friday night for 10 migrants had failed. All were seized by the Turkish Coast Guard shortly after setting out.

He had given his customers their money back — about $500 per person — and they told him they were going back to Istanbul, where they had been living.

“They changed their minds because it was their last chance,” said Mr. Ali. “I don’t have any passengers right now. No one is trying to go.”