Liz Alderman, Kareem Fahim
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/02/world/europe/amid-clashes-greece-presses-on-with-plan-to-deport-migrants.html
In Geneva, the refugee agency warned Friday that neither Greece nor Turkey was ready to handle mass returns of migrants and said both countries needed to provide further protections for asylum seekers before undertaking deportations. Citing what it called “continued serious gaps” in preparations, the agency released a nine-page document detailing the conditions that it said must be satisfied.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

One the strongest criticisms of the agreement came from Amnesty International, the London-based rights group, which claimed to have proof that Turkey was not safe for refugees. In a new report released 72 hours before the deportations were to begin, Amnesty accused the Turkish government of forcing hundreds of Syrian asylum seekers back to their war-torn country in recent months, contravening human rights procedures. Amnesty said it had collected witness testimony in Turkey’s southern Hatay Province and found that the Turkish authorities had been “rounding up and expelling groups of around 100 Syrian men, women and children to Syria on a near-daily basis since mid-January.”

Among the cases the group claimed to have documented was that of three young children forced back to Syria without their parents.

A Turkish government spokesman did not immediately respond to messages seeking comment. Turkey has previously denied forcibly returning refugees to Syria.

Criticism of the impending deportations came against a backdrop of consternation over the lengths European leaders have been willing to go to keep migrants away — including offering billions in aid to Turkey to conclude the agreement, while ignoring an increasingly harsh crackdown on President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s opponents by the Turkish authorities.

“E.U. leaders have willfully ignored the simplest of facts: Turkey is not a safe country for Syrian refugees and is getting less safe by the day,” Amnesty’s director for Europe and Central Asia, John Dalhuisen, said in the report.

Greece’s Parliament nonetheless scrambled Friday to get a legal framework in place before Monday to carry out its end of the European Union deal. In a hurried session, lawmakers were expected to support draft legislation to allow returns to begin Monday, most likely from the Greek island of Lesbos, where large numbers of Afghan and Pakistani migrants have been held since the bloc signed the accord with Turkey.

More than 50,000 other migrants, stuck on the Greek mainland, remain in limbo about their future, but are growing restless ahead of the scheduled deportation. On Wednesday, around 300 migrants, mostly Afghans and Syrians, engaged in the several violent clashes in the Piraeus port, where many have been holed up since Macedonia and other northern countries closed their borders, cutting off Europe’s main gateway to Germany, the migrants’ preferred destination.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Idomeni, two people set themselves on fire earlier this week to protest the border closings after being stuck in the camp for nearly a month. Hundreds of migrants there have joined the protests, chanting “Open the border!” and refusing to take buses to official military-run camps, fearing deportation to Turkey.