Liz Alderman
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/11/world/europe/macedonia-greece-migrants-refugees.html
The group, whose main leaders were arrested in 2013 on charges of leading a criminal organization, had been largely silent since the migrant crisis took hold. Yet in recent days its leaders, who had since been released from custody, said the party was planning numerous protests around the country against what they warn is the “Islamization of Greece” by Muslim asylum seekers coming mainly from Afghanistan, Syria and elsewhere in the Middle East.

“We cannot accept that we will become a minority in our homeland,” Ilias Kasidiaris, the spokesman for Golden Dawn and a member of the Greek Parliament, said in an interview late Friday. He spoke after the group held a large protest near Piraeus, the port of Athens, where nearly 5,000 migrants have been living in warehouses and pup tents for more than a month.

Photo

“Whether you call them refugees or illegals, there’s no difference — we want them out,” added Mr. Kasidiaris, whose party last week also threatened a group of migrants camped at the port of the Greek island of Chios.

He added that Golden Dawn aligned itself with statements made by Donald J. Trump, who had called for Muslims to be barred from the United States. “It would be a very positive development if he were to be elected president,” Mr. Kasidiaris said.

The clashes in Idomeni unfolded when a group of migrants acting as emissaries for those in the Idomeni camp approached the barbed-wire-topped border fence and asked the Macedonian police to open it to let them continue north. When the request was declined, the men apparently threw rocks at the police, who responded by firing tear gas at the growing crowd.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Doctors Without Borders and several other humanitarian groups in Idomeni said in statements that they were treating numerous people for injuries, including men who had been knocked unconscious as well as children, after tear gas blew into hundreds of flimsy pup tents where the migrants have been living in the mud over the last several weeks.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Under the deal that took effect last month, all migrants who arrived in Greece on or after March 20 are to be deported to Turkey. Migrants who arrived in Greece before March 20 are to have their applications processed in Greece and will not be deported to Turkey if the applications are approved.

Afghans and other migrants who were in Greece before March 20 but are unlikely to qualify for asylum in Europe can remain in Greece until their fate is decided, but if their applications are denied they will not be able to remain legally in Europe.

The Greek authorities have said they want to clear out the Idomeni camp soon and move people to nearby military-style encampments, which they say offer better shelter than the flimsy tents that now carpet the fields abutting the Macedonian border. Migrants, however, have been reluctant to leave, fearing that once they go, the authorities may try to shut them in the camps.

Officials also appealed over the weekend to the thousands of migrants camped in Piraeus to leave voluntarily or risk being relocated forcibly within the next two weeks. Violent brawls have broken out in the port and in migrant camps elsewhere in Greece recently, adding a sense of urgency to the situation.