Robert Mackey, Hwaida Saad, Open Source
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/24/world/europe/syrian-refugee-tripped-in-hungary-denies-extremist-ties.html
While stating that he did not recall everything he had posted on Facebook over the years — and the image of the banner has now been removed from his page — Mr. Mohsen suggested that supporters of Mr. Assad were intentionally distorting his views to try to discredit him after his criticism of the government.

He also pointed out, accurately, that the banner pictured on his page was not, as several bloggers have asserted, the flag of the Nusra Front. The group’s flag does feature the Arabic script of the Shahada in white letters on a black background, but also prominently displays the faction’s name, Jabhat al-Nusra, in Arabic. The banner posted on Mr. Mohsen’s page, he noted, simply says, “‘There is no god but God,’ so I don’t see what the problem is; Saudi Arabia has the same words on its flag.” (As Jenna McLaughlin, a reporter for The Intercept, pointed out last year in Mother Jones, flags featuring the Shahada are frequently mistaken for one another by non-Muslim observers.)

The allegations about Mr. Mohsen come as he is trying to settle in Spain and get permission for his wife and two more of their children to move there from Turkey.

Among those promoting the claim that Mr. Mohsen was a supporter or member of the Nusra Front was Leith Abou Fadel, the Syrian editor of a pro-government news site. Writing on Facebook and Twitter, Mr. Fadel drew attention to what he called evidence of Mr. Mohsen’s extremist sympathies on Sept. 13, five days after Mr. Mohsen was tripped by the Hungarian journalist Petra Laszlo while trying to avoid detention in Hungary.

Asked to back up his allegation, Mr. Fadel pointed to a Facebook update posted on Mr. Mohsen’s page on Oct. 12, 2013, in which he called those fighting Syria’s government heroes and mujahedeen, or holy warriors.

While Mr. Mohsen’s comments there clearly mark him as a supporter of some insurgents fighting to topple Mr. Assad, who is a member of the minority Alawite sect, the word “mujahedeen” is commonly used in Syria to refer to all of the Sunni Muslim rebel factions. That includes more moderate groups supported by the United States, not just the Nusra Front, which is backed by Al Qaeda.

Although Mr. Fadel said Wednesday in a Twitter exchange that he did not know if Mr. Mohsen had fought for the Nusra Front, he did call him “a former member of Jabhat Al-Nusra (Al-Qaeda),” in a Facebook post last week, in which he added, “looks like Europe will be receiving more Islamist scumbags.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Fadel, whose Facebook profile photograph shows him with the Syrian ambassador to the United Nations, tempered his criticism of Mr. Mohsen on Wednesday, saying, “Whether he is a former fighter or not, I cannot confirm — but I am happy his son is safe.” Still, the pro-government journalist’s Facebook post appears to have helped spread the rumor that Mr. Mohsen was either a supporter or a member of Nusra far and wide.

Two days later, the screen shot of Mr. Mohsen’s Facebook page shared by Mr. Fadel was presented as evidence of the coach’s support for terrorism by Ezra Levant, a conservative Canadian political commentator (who has been faulted in the past for failing to check his facts and going out of his way to insult Muslims).

Pointing to the image of the banner on Mr. Mohsen’s Facebook page in a video blog commentary, Mr. Levant asked his viewers: “Can you identify that black flag? I can, it’s the black flag of al-Nusra, a terrorist group as defined by Canada, the U.S., the U.N.”

A screen shot of Mr. Fadel’s Facebook post about Mr. Mohsen was also used to illustrate a statement condemning him from a Syrian Kurdish group, the Democratic Union Party, known by the initials P.Y.D. Although that statement, which called Mr. Mohsen a Nusra fighter, did not cite any evidence beyond what was found on his Facebook page, it was widely shared and added a new allegation: that Mr. Mohsen had taken part in rioting that led to the deaths of Kurdish soccer fans in northern Syria in 2004.

Speaking by telephone from Spain, Mr. Mohsen insisted that he was not involved in the riot in the city of Qamishli on March 12, 2004. At least seven Kurdish fans were killed by the security forces after fighting broke out between Arab supporters of the Syrian Premier League club he coached and Kurdish fans of a rival team.

The killings, and more deaths the next day when demonstrators were shot at a funeral, set off a wave of protests and came against the backdrop of sectarian tensions exacerbated by the American invasion of Iraq. According to a witness account, fighting between the rival fans started after the mainly Sunni Muslim supporters of Mr. Mohsen’s team, al-Fotuwa of Deir al-Zour, chanted in praise of Saddam Hussein — who had massacred Iraqi Kurds with chemical weapons — and the Kurdish supporters of the other team responded with chants for President George W. Bush. (The U.S. invasion of Iraq had revived hopes for an independent Kurish nation.)

Although Mustafa Ebdi, a well-known Kurdish journalist, criticized the P.Y.D. for making such serious accusations against Mr. Mohsen without presenting evidence, the post on the group’s official website was translated into English by Kurdish news sites and television channels, and attracted the attention of the Spanish news media.

Asked on Wednesday about the allegation that he supported or fought for the Nusra Front, Mr. Mohsen told La Gaceta, a Spanish newspaper, that it was “a lie.”

“I criticized Bashar al-Assad,” he said, “and anyone who criticizes him will have to deal with lies.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I love peace. I do not like Bashar al-Assad, I do not like al-Nusra,” Mr. Mohsen told the paper. “I am a Muslim and I do not like death. I just want a better life. I just want to live peacefully with my family and my friends.”