Melissa Eddy, Rick Lyman, Alison Smale
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/14/world/europe/germany-emergency-measures-european-migrant-crisis.html
When word of the new restrictions made the rounds at the main station in Salzburg, Austria, the last major stop on the rail journey to Germany, hundreds of migrants were taken off the blocked trains and to a garage nearby, the German Press Agency said.

Photo

A simple sign was posted on the station’s information boards: “No railway service by order of German authorities due to the German migrant crisis.”

Interior Minister Thomas de Maizière said that it was “desperately necessary” for Germany to limit the number of people coming into the country and “reinstate an orderly entry process” after two weeks that left the country straining to accommodate the new arrivals.

Although one of the proudest European achievements of recent decades was passport-free travel between most member nations, the rules allow the reinstatement of border restrictions in cases of crisis and national security, he said.

“This measure is also a signal to Europe” that more needs to be done, and quickly, Mr. de Maizière said. “Introducing temporary border controls will not solve the whole problem,” he said.

Also on Sunday, Ms. Merkel spoke with Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission, who proposed a plan last week to relocate 160,000 migrants who are waiting in the main front-line nations of Greece, Italy and Hungary.

The proposal, to be discussed Monday in Brussels by the bloc’s home affairs ministers, includes 40,000 migrants covered under an earlier plan that collapsed when several member nations refused to accept mandatory quotas of refugees, as well as 120,000 more.

Photo

Leaders of several countries, including Poland and the Czech Republic, have said they still object to any mandatory quotas, but may be willing to accept more new arrivals as long as it is voluntary.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Hundreds of thousands of migrants have been surging into Europe for nearly two years from war-torn areas of the Middle East, as well as Afghanistan, Pakistan, Eritrea and elsewhere in Africa.

Many of them aim to reach Germany, but others try to get to Sweden, Britain, the Netherlands and other nations.

Previously, the route of choice was across the Mediterranean Sea from Libya. But with that path growing increasingly dangerous, a shorter boat ride from Turkey, to an overland route from Greece to Macedonia to Serbia to southern Hungary started attracting more people this summer.

Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orban, responded by beginning the construction of a razor-wire fence along the country’s entire 108-mile border with Serbia.

Mr. Orban has also promised a fresh crackdown against those crossing the border when new laws take effect in Hungary on Tuesday, imposing harsh prison penalties for entering the country illegally and allowing the building of “transit centers” right at the border where migrants could be held while their cases are being considered.

Photo

In announcing Germany’s new border restrictions, Mr. de Maizière also called for the creation of what he called “waiting zones” along the union’s external borders where migrants could be registered and wait until they are granted refugee status and assigned to a country.

Hungary’s government, which has taken a particularly hard line in the crisis, reacted warmly to Germany’s announcement on Sunday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Hungary understands Germany’s decision, and Hungary is standing by Germany,” Peter Szijjarto, the country’s foreign minister, said at a news conference.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

He said Hungary welcomed Berlin’s decision, which he described as defending German and European values, adding that Hungary made a new proposal of its own on Sunday: calling for a Continentwide effort to defend the borders of Greece, the first stop on the migrant path.

The migrants who eventually make their way to Hungary usually begin their journey into Europe with a short, but often perilous, sea crossing from Turkey to one of the nearer Greek islands.

If European leaders could close off that flow, Hungarian officials said Sunday, the numbers moving through the Balkans into Central Europe would dwindle to a trickle. Advocates for refugees say that those determined to reach Europe will only find other paths.

Photo

Just how dangerous that sea crossing can be was evident again Sunday when the Greek Coast Guard recovered the bodies of 34 migrants, including 15 children, after their boat capsized in the Aegean Sea. An additional 68 were rescued, and 30 others managed to swim to the nearby island of Farmakonisi.

The land portion of the journey offers dangers, too. The Austrian authorities said they had saved 42 people on Sunday from a refrigerated truck near the German border, and arrested two smugglers. Just last month, 71 people were found dead in the back of such a truck near the Austrian-Hungarian border.

Germany has said it expects 800,000 migrants by year’s end, but has indicated up to now that it can handle the newcomers, and even welcomed their addition to its aging work force.

But the numbers arriving have continued to grow, and Germany’s humanitarian network is wobbling under the strain.

On Saturday, around 12,000 migrants arrived in Munich, with 4,000 more by Sunday afternoon. More beds are needed, Munich officials said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And more migrants are on the way. Before Germany closed off rail traffic from Austria, Austrian officials said 500 migrants were arriving every hour at the main border crossing between Hungary and Austria, with 7,000 crossing that day before 3 p.m.

European Refugee and Migrant Crisis

The city of Salzburg sent out a post on Twitter asking residents to bring blankets and camping pads to the railway station to help accommodate several hundred people spending the night there and in a nearby parking garage.

On the Serbian border, the Hungarian authorities said that 4,330 migrants were detained Saturday for crossing illegally, an increase of 700 over the previous one-day record.

And many thousands more are waiting to cross behind them, or are making their slow way to the border.

“The influx is simply not stopping right now,” said Lt. Col. Helmut Marban, a police spokesman in Austria’s easternmost state. “We really have our plates full.”

Guntram B. Wolff, director of Breugel, a Brussels research group, said Germany’s decision to impose controls seemed to be “an interim thing,” rather than a sign that the European Union, panicked by a disorderly influx of migrants, was retreating from the principle of open borders.

“It is just a measure to slow down the flow and to handle things in a more orderly manner,” he said.

But if some Europe-wide agreement is not reached to deal with the crisis, Mr. Wolff said, the so-called Schengen system that allows passport-free travel across 26 countries is in danger of collapsing.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“There has to be a European solution, and if there is not one, then Schengen will come under pressure,” he said. “For the moment, Schengen is still there.”

Abdelkahar Sherzad, a 28-year-old from Afghanistan, heard about Germany’s new restrictions only after waiting four days for a train out of Budapest’s Keleti station.

“I would really like to go to Germany,” Mr. Sherzad said. “But if they don’t let me go, I will consider other options, like staying in Austria or trying to go to another country. I won’t stop.”