Anemona Hartocollis
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/14/world/europe/greece-kos-migrants-refugees-syria.html
Aid workers estimate that there are 6,000 to 7,000 refugees and migrants from countries like Syria staying on Kos, the equivalent of about 20 percent of the island’s normal population. Most of them made the short trip from Turkey, whose coastline is clearly visible across the harbor, by rubber dinghy in the middle of the night.

Video

Many of them are now camped under palm trees and in the grass of the promenade that lines the main harbor. They hang their clothes on the fences, and some sleep in tents they have purchased. Those who can afford it go to cafes to buy food and to use the bathrooms. In a striking juxtaposition, tourists cycle past on bike paths or sit in cafes overlooking the migrant encampments and the sparkling blue water beyond.

Mr. Kiritsis said that Kos had welcomed and cared for the migrants, despite Greece’s economic problems, and that at least so far, tourists seemed to be taking their presence in stride.

“I want to give you the message that the society of Kos is a society of love and solidarity,” he said. “There are people who receive free food every day. There are establishments — restaurants, hotels — that provide hospitality to people who have problems, who don’t have money, without charge.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

A spokeswoman for Doctors Without Borders said Wednesday that people had been herded into the stadium and locked up there without food, water or toilets.

Some migrants interviewed Thursday said they had been among those shut in the stadium. They said that some men had been able to jump over the walls and bring back food and water, but that women and children had been stuck inside.

The scene outside the stadium on Thursday was peaceful but still somewhat tense as migrants, mainly men, lined up in the hot sun to be registered. One of them, Elie Alnasser, a chef who had been living in Lebanon, said he had arrived in Kos several days earlier and had been paying 35 euros a night, about $39, for a hotel room while he waited for papers that would allow him to move on.

Mr. Alnasser said he hoped to find his way to Sweden or the Netherlands. “I like France a lot,” he said in broken French. “But I think they don’t allow Syrians.”

Mr. Kiritsis, the mayor, said he expected a ship to arrive from the mainland on Friday that could be used to house and feed about 3,000 of the refugees and migrants so they would no longer have to camp outside.