Stephen Castle
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/21/world/europe/britain-france-calais-migrant-crisis.html
Britain is also promising more spending to reinforce the perimeter of the Eurotunnel railhead with tougher fencing, CCTV, flood lighting and infrared detection technology.

Extra search teams, including detection dogs, will be deployed, more mobile French policing units will be added and a security audit will be conducted, according to the British Home Office.

The problems at Calais have disrupted truck drivers and travelers, but they are only a small part of the migration crisis sweeping Europe. In July alone, the number of migrants detected at the borders of the 28-nation European Union rose to 107,500, more than three times the number in the same month last year, according to Frontex, the bloc’s border management agency.

“I believe that in front of this international and very serious issue, which leads to an increase of the migratory flow pressure all around Europe, we must understand here in Calais that the issue goes beyond Calais and even beyond the frame of our bilateral cooperation,” Mr. Cazeneuve said. “It’s an issue that leads us to also work closely with the authorities of the countries from those people come from.”

Video

Although the number of attempts to storm the Channel appears to have fallen recently — Mr. Cazeneuve said the figures were now one-tenth of what they were a few weeks ago — the images of chaos on the border between two of Europe’s richest nations have highlighted the inability of Europe to deal with the migratory crisis prompted by war and economic hardship in the Middle East and Africa.

Under reciprocal arrangements, British officials conduct passport checks on those crossing the Channel on French soil, before their journey, making them reliant on French cooperation. Although some British politicians have criticized France for failing to deal with the migrant problems at Calais, the government has been careful not to do so.

The scenes at Calais have stoked Britain’s debate about migration, however, and last month, Prime Minister David Cameron was criticized after he referred to the large number of migrants crossing the Mediterranean as a “swarm,” although he later said he had not been trying to dehumanize people trying to reach Europe.

Policy makers in Europe face a big collective challenge in dealing with the crisis, and efforts to agree on quotas for European Union countries to accept refugees have achieved only limited success.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“This is an absolute human tragedy, with people who are dying and people who are in terrible situations,” the French foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, said on Thursday, according to Reuters.