Niki Kitsantonis
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/14/world/europe/greece-migrants-refugees-drown-in-agean.html
ATHENS — The Greek Coast Guard recovered the bodies of 34 migrants, including 15 children, on Sunday in the Aegean Sea after their wooden boat flipped over in strong winds as it attempted the short but often perilous crossing from nearby Turkey.

Sixty-eight others were rescued, and 30 more swam ashore to the small Greek island of Farmakonisi in the eastern Aegean, according to an official at the Greek Shipping Ministry. “It was really windy in the morning,” the official said, describing near-gale conditions.

Rescuers, who were alerted shortly before dawn by a resident of Farmakonisi, found most of the bodies floating near the wreck, but divers recovered seven from the cabin of the boat. Of the 15 children found dead, four were infants, the official said. The victims’ nationalities were not immediately known.

European Refugee and Migrant Crisis

After nightfall, Coast Guard vessels continued to scour the area for survivors. Rescuers were also searching for four children who had been missing since Saturday after their boat capsized off the island of Samos, north of Farmakonisi.

Sunday’s wreck was the latest in a catalog of drownings that underscored the desperation of thousands of refugees fleeing war and of migrants seeking better lives in Western Europe. For most of those who make it, Greece is just a stop on a journey through the Balkans aimed at wealthy nations like Germany and Scandinavian countries like Sweden known for generous welfare programs.

Greece has long been a favored entry point, along with Italy and Malta. But the influx into Greece increased drastically this year, partly because of continuing strife in Syria and other parts of the Middle East. In the first eight months of the year, 230,000 people were intercepted by the Greek Coast Guard, compared with 17,500 in the same period last year, according to the shipping minister, Nikos Zois. Last week, Greece asked for emergency funding from the European Union to improve its response to the migration crisis and to set up additional reception facilities.

Figures released by the International Organization for Migration last week stated that more than 430,000 migrants and refugees crossed the Mediterranean to Europe this year, with 2,748 drowning or going missing on the way.

Speaking earlier Sunday on Lesbos, another Greek island that has borne the brunt of a seemingly relentless flow of migrants, Greece’s caretaker prime minister, Vassiliki Thanou, dismissed criticism of the country’s efforts as “unacceptable.” She called on critics to “consider the size of the responsibility of guarding European borders that stretch along 16,000 kilometers of coastline.”

Her statement came a day after Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany called on Athens to intensify its attempts to protect the European Union’s external borders. “Greece needs to assume its responsibility,” she said.

For Greece, which is struggling with an enduring financial crisis as well as political upheaval, the surge in arrivals of migrants and refugees could not have come at a more challenging time. Islands like Lesbos, Kos and Samos, which are closest to Turkey, have been particularly overwhelmed and lack the resources to accommodate the thousands arriving daily at their shores.

Tensions peaked on Lesbos this month with scuffles between police officers and migrants in the main port. The situation improved last week after more than 20,000 migrants were transferred by ferry to Greece’s main port, Piraeus, near Athens, relieving the pressure on the island of 80,000 residents.

Most of the migrants are now camping in squares across the capital, planning the next leg of their journey deeper into Europe.