Alison Smale
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/03/world/europe/austria-afghan-migrants.html
The smugglers had welded shut a bolt on the back doors as well as a sliding door on the side, and had put bars on the back windows, Mr. Keiblinger said. The sole window between the driver’s seat and the back of the van had been blacked out and closed, he said.

Video

“In effect, it was a jail cell,” said Mr. Keiblinger, who described photographs showing the Afghans, all ages 16 to 20, standing and kneeling in the van. “They had no air; it was basically a situation of life or death.”

He said the Afghans reported being herded into the vehicle by an accomplice of the driver. They did not say where this happened, but Mr. Keiblinger said it was most likely in Hungary, close to the border, which is about an hour’s drive from Vienna.

The police here became suspicious of the vehicle around midnight on Monday and began to chase the van. The van was forced off a highway and onto Vienna streets, where the driver eventually stopped and ran away, Mr. Keiblinger said.

The driver did not stop even after an officer fired a warning shot into the ground, Mr. Keiblinger said.

A police dog named Iceman picked up the driver’s scent and led officers to a shopping center where they arrested the suspect, described as a 30-year-old Romanian man.

Mr. Keiblinger indicated that the 24 Afghans would probably join the many migrants heading for Germany. They all declined to apply for asylum in Austria, he said, and were freed after the police gave them food and drink and questioned them.

Since Austria stepped up police action late Sunday, officers in the eastern province of Burgenland, which borders Hungary, have arrested 24 suspected smugglers and freed hundreds of migrants stashed in vehicles, a police spokesman, Helmut Marban, told Austria Press Agency. On Sunday alone, 239 migrants were freed, followed by 307 on Monday and 305 on Tuesday, he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Vienna, according to the police, four suspected traffickers were arrested on Monday and Tuesday. In the first case, the police freed eight people — four men, two women and two girls, all said to have been from Iraq — from two vehicles with Swedish license plates. A Canadian and a Serbian citizen were detained. In the second, a 47-year-old Serb was arrested after the police stopped his vehicle — specially adapted to hide people — and freed 10 Iraqis.

Austria’s interior minister, Johanna Mikl-Leitner, visited the police station where the van carrying the 24 Afghans was stored and pronounced the traffickers “impossible, and inhuman.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“I don’t think any of us can imagine what fear the people in this transport had to live through,” said Ms. Mikl-Leitner, who planned to visit Macedonia and meet her Balkan counterparts on Friday to get a picture of how many migrants are still massed along their hoped-for route to Europe, and what action is feasible.

The discovery of the 71 bodies last week has shocked this prosperous Alpine nation, which has been basking in unusual summer heat and its usual throngs of tourists.

The visitors are still there, but many Austrians have expressed concern about the much poorer and more desperate migrants whose arrival has prompted an outpouring of sympathy, but also propelled longstanding populists in the anti-immigration Freedom Party to new highs in opinion polls.

On Monday night, as thousands of migrants headed west from Hungary on trains that were eventually allowed to Vienna and beyond, a demonstration called at short notice to show solidarity with migrants drew 20,000 people, according to the police. On the same evening, prominent and ordinary Austrians flocked to St. Stephen’s Cathedral for a Mass led by Archbishop Christoph Schönborn, the head of the country’s Roman Catholic Church, in memory of the 71 people, including three boys and a little girl, found dead last week.