Melissa Eddy
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/28/world/europe/germany-merkel-refugee-crisis.html
BERLIN — The German cabinet endorsed measures on Wednesday that would make it easier to deport many noncitizens convicted of crimes, responding to outrage over the sexual assault of hundreds of women by foreigners on New Year’s Eve and growing skepticism about the government’s ability to accommodate more than one million asylum seekers.

The legislation would lower the bar for denying criminals the right to stay in Germany, allowing the authorities to require anyone to leave the country if convicted of homicide, bodily harm, sexual assault, violent theft or serial shoplifting, even if given only a suspended sentence.

The measures require approval in Parliament, but Chancellor Angela Merkel’s coalition holds a majority there and they are expected to pass easily.

Ms. Merkel’s refusal to limit the number of migrants entering the country has damaged her popularity and caused a rift in her governing coalition.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Other countries in Europe have declined to take in a proportionate share of the migrants who continue to arrive by the thousands, and several have instead responded with measures to restrict migrants.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Germany’s persistent willingness to accept migrants has meant that ever more are arriving in the country. Public support, however, has shifted from the ecstatic welcome of the summer to increasing unease that only worsened after asylum seekers were linked to sexual assaults on women celebrating the New Year in Cologne.