Steven Erlanger
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/23/world/europe/belgium-attacks-migrants.html
The attacks will also put more strain on the deal brokered last week by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany with the Turkish government to restrict the migrant flow into Europe, in return for more liberal visa arrangements for travel into Europe by Turkish nationals. That deal was already being criticized as a security threat to Europe and had been questioned on humanitarian and legal grounds.

“In the public eye everything gets connected: the mass abuse in Cologne on New Year’s Eve and the attacks today,” said Rem Korteweg, a security analyst at the Center for European Reform in London, referring to the sexual abuse and robberies in Cologne on New Year’s Eve that were linked to migrants. “However different, in the public mind and for the euroskeptic populace, they’re all the same thing.”

The fierce reaction was evident on Tuesday in Germany, where Ms. Merkel’s popularity has been dented by her decision to open the country’s borders to more than one million migrants last year, aiding the Alternative for Germany party in recent state elections. Officials in Ms. Merkel’s government who made the usual statements of support for victims were mocked and criticized on social media.

Video

“The despicable attacks in Brussels draw us all together: Solidarity with the victims + determination against the terrorists,” Ms. Merkel’s spokesman, Steffen Seibert, wrote on Twitter.

The response was fast and fierce. “Whoever opens the borders and supports uncontrolled immigration, giving terrorists free run, has no place pretending here!” wrote a man calling himself Paul Paul. Another user, Roland Z, wrote of Ms. Merkel: “Your boss is still bringing these Islamists to Germany in hordes.” And a user with the name Eva-Maria Schultheis posted: “Ms. Merkel welcomed them all with open arms and this is what it has led to.”

Even those not directly blaming the migrants or the politicians showed the strain of attacks that struck four months apart on public places in major European cities. “We’re anxious,” said another Twitter user, Johanna Bayer. “ Paris-Brussels — the attacks are getting ever closer.”

The authorities in North Rhine-Westphalia, the German state next to Belgium, announced tighter controls on the border on Tuesday, with the state’s interior minister leveling unusually sharp public criticism at his Belgian colleagues. North Rhine includes Cologne, where the New Year’s Eve attacks took place.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Belgium failed to discover a terrorist cell in the Brussels neighborhood of Molenbeek and “should possibly have acted sooner,” said Ralf Jäger, the minister. ”It’s not a question of individual actors organizing themselves — on the contrary, the mode of action was structured and agreed,” he added. “And that is what is frightening: that such a cell could not be discovered.”

Photo

His comments were quickly derided by Armin Laschet, the leader of the opposition in North Rhine-Westphalia, who suggested that Mr. Jäger, under fire for the policing failures in Cologne, would do better to keep quiet.

This fear of refugees and immigrants, which is tied to anxieties about globalization and losses of both jobs and national identity, is not just a European issue. Donald J. Trump has gained traction with his promise to build a wall between the United States and Mexico and his association of Muslims with terrorism and immigrants with crime.

But in Europe, the insecurity around migration and terrorism has challenged key beliefs and principles of the European Union.

The Schengen area of visa-free travel across 26 countries has already broken down under the pressure of the migrant flow, with many worried that the zone may never be fully resurrected because of terrorism. Analysts say that attacks like those in Paris and Brussels make it far more likely that European governments will insist on stricter passport, visa and luggage checks at their borders.

Mike Hookem, a member of the European Parliament from the U.K. Independence Party, said that the “horrific act of terrorism shows that Schengen free movement and lax border controls are a threat to our security.”

There have also been various reports of migrants traveling to Europe on false Syrian passports, sometimes taken from the dead, and of overwhelmed authorities unable to keep track of the thousands of people traveling the roads and railways.

Holger Schmieding of Berenberg, Germany’s largest private bank, warned that while “logic would suggest that a terror attack strengthens the case for closer cooperation in Europe,” the attacks instead “may trigger a knee-jerk reaction to get further away from the European Continent, and Brussels especially, among those who are somewhat skeptical of what ‘Brussels’ stands for anyway.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Sad as it is,” he added, “there is some risk that the terror attacks may end up strengthening the ‘leave-the-E.U’ camp.”

Migrants themselves intrinsically understand the connection between their precarious situation and the violence. On Tuesday, at the Kara Tepe refugee camp on the island of Lesbos in Greece, Abdullah Zahed, 25, and his wife, Breshna Alawee, 27, who fled Afghanistan in early March, pleaded for understanding.

“We are refugees,” Ms. Alawee said. “We are not terrorists.”

Mr. Zahed added: “We ourselves are running from these types of attacks in Afghanistan.”