Sewell Chan
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/28/world/europe/europe-migrants-refugees-report.html
The state of emergency allows security forces to conduct searches and to make arrests without warrants, and a lack of judicial oversight makes religious profiling, particularly of young Muslim men, more likely.

“Police stops based on such profiling have long plagued the very populations that should be cultivated to help counter violence,” the report said.

Photo

Human Rights Watch urged the European Union to expand refugee resettlement programs and to issue humanitarian visas in “places of first refuge,” like Lebanon (for Syrian refugees) and Pakistan (for Afghan refugees).

Nearly 3,800 people, a third of them children, drowned in the Mediterranean while trying to reach Europe last year, and a more humane and orderly process would make it easier to keep out terrorists, the group said.

It also urged the Persian Gulf states and Russia, along with countries that traditionally take in many migrants, like Australia, Canada and the United States, to accept more.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The United States has pledged to take in 85,000 refugees this year. Human Rights Watch condemned the dozens of United States governors who unsuccessfully sought to bar Syrian refugees from entering their states, and contrasted their stance with that of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada, who has accelerated the plan to take in 25,000 Syrian migrants and who has embraced the newcomers.

The report, with chapters on more than 90 countries or territories, did not focus only on migrants. It also faulted Russia for fanning nationalism and for suppressing dissent as its economy sours; China for arresting lawyers and activists; the presidents of Turkey and Burundi, for organizing crackdowns related to their efforts to cling to power; and the governments of Kenya and Sudan for thwarting investigations by the International Criminal Court.

The report noted that Ethiopia, India, Russia and several other former Soviet countries had enacted restrictions on civic groups that receive foreign funding, to choke off potential sources of dissent.

It faulted Bolivia, Cambodia, Ecuador, Hungary, Morocco and several other countries for using vaguely worded laws or regulations to suppress political expression, and Brazil, China and Egypt, among other nations, for using terrorism as a pretext for cracking down on civil liberties.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Human Rights Watch, which is based in New York, did not spare the United States from criticism. It denounced the nation’s high incarceration rate, racial disparities in criminal justice, the widespread use of solitary confinement, and the continuing detention, without criminal charges or trials, of foreign prisoners in the American military installation at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.