Liz Alderman
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/03/world/europe/greece-scrambles-to-respond-to-migrants-in-limbo-and-more-arriving.html
Afghans, who make up about a third of migrants entering Greece as a back door to Europe, are becoming the largest group to be stuck in limbo here after Macedonia and countries to its north last week abruptly reclassified them as economic migrants rather than refugees. Thousands are waiting around in camps or venturing into central Athens, clutching registration papers, fielding pitches from smugglers for alternate routes to Germany and Austria and trying to figure any way to avoid returning to Afghanistan.

“Even with the border closed, Afghan people will still come: They would rather brave problems here than face danger and conflict,” said Jamshid Azizi, 24, an Afghan who was stuck at Schisto, a camp the government scrambled to open last week near Piraeus, after the Macedonian police returned him to Greece following two attempts to make his way north. “We are going to wait here to see if the border opens, and if not, we will do what we can to avoid going back.”

Video

Even while Europe remains politically paralyzed over how to handle the migrants, it seems to be confronting the reality that refugee camps could be present on the Continent for years to come. On Wednesday, the European Union acknowledged for the first time that a humanitarian crisis was brewing inside its borders, agreeing on an emergency aid package of 700 million euros, or $760 million, over three years to help Greece and other countries on the migrant trail deal with the backlog.

At least initially, a majority of the funding is expected to go to help the situation in Greece, and the move highlights the uncertain future for that country, where a debt crisis that began six years ago threatened to sink the euro, the European Union’s flagship economic project.

But the money did not address the most pressing issue: getting migrants to stop thinking about Europe as their haven from war and economic uncertainty.

Even if Europe reaches an agreement at a special summit meeting on March 7 in Brussels to stem the tide of people crossing from Turkey, humanitarian aid groups warn that desperate people fleeing Syria and Iraq will still try to come in anyway, while Afghans and others who do not currently qualify for political asylum could remain in Greece for a considerable period.

Video

On Tuesday, the top NATO commander in Europe, Gen. Philip M. Breedlove of the United States Air Force, warned lawmakers in Washington that Russia and the Assad government in Syria were “deliberately weaponizing migration in an attempt to overwhelm European structures and break European resolve.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

At the Schisto camp, a former military barracks that the army converted into a refugee center in just 11 days, preparations were already underway to transform it into a semi-permanent holding facility. On a recent day, more than 1,400 migrants, all but three of them Afghans, milled outside under military surveillance, surrounded by a high fence topped with barbed wire. Around 150 white tents held eight people apiece, while larger tents held scores of additional beds.

By the end of March, however, the camp is to be expanded with container shelters to accommodate at least 4,000 people “for as long as they need to stay,” said Vassilis Thanos, an army spokesman.

Already, a construction crew was clearing space for a playground near a makeshift clinic, a food hall and a worship area. The accommodations would keep women and children — who now make up around 60 percent of incoming migrants — separate from the men “in order to respect their culture,” Mr. Thanos said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

If the military base was run in an orderly way, other camps were not.

Half an hour away, among the hulking, graffiti-riddled skeletons of unused buildings at the former Olympic Stadium, another camp had been set up inside an arena abutting a soccer field. Surrounded by barbed wire, more than 1,300 migrants fended for themselves inside the dilapidated facility. Migrants said no one seemed to know how long they would stay or when they could move on.

Along dingy, airless corridors thick with the odor of sweat, women lay on thin mats sleeping deeply as children wandered the area and young men whiled away the time playing soccer. On the floor, sewage had overflowed the day earlier, soaking some of the sleeping mats. Men and women formed long lines to get food prepared by a handful of volunteers who crowded a small kitchen, chopping tomatoes and scrambling to ensure that there was enough food to go around.

Often there was not. In the parking lot outside the stadium, migrants mobbed cars driven up by good Samaritans who lived in the area and came to hand out bread, sweets and other food. “Even if the border is closed, they need to eat,” said Vangelis Vozikis, 55, who had come to distribute croissants.

Many migrants seeking relief from the camps make their way to the center of Athens to Victoria Square, a tree-lined park where young men, mostly Afghans and Iranians, sleep under the open air as smugglers troll their ranks.

Scores of Greeks wandered into the square, handing out supplies and homemade food. Later, migrants crowded around police officers as they brandished photos of the Olympic Center. Earlier in the day, the former baseball field had opened and the officers were trying to persuade the migrants to get on buses to go there for shelter and food.

The sales pitch fell on deaf ears.

“We won’t go,” said Ahmed, a teenager from Afghanistan. “We don’t want to go anywhere until we know whether the borders will open.”