Safak Timur
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/05/world/europe/syrians-sentenced-aylan-alan-kurdi.html
Photo

ISTANBUL — Two Syrian men were sentenced to more than four years in prison on Friday for the death of a young Syrian boy whose body washed up on a beach in Turkey in September.

The death of the boy, Alan Kurdi, and the gripping photo of his body lying facedown in the sand and surf of the beach focused the world’s attention on the plight of migrants risking their lives to flee war and deprivation.

Photo

The Turkish news agency Dogan identified the two men as Muwafaka Alabash, 36, and Asem Alfrhad, 35. A court in the coastal resort town of Bodrum, in southwestern Turkey, convicted them of smuggling refugees, five of whom died, including Alan, 2; his 5-year-old brother, Galip; and their mother, Rihan. They all drowned when the 15-foot rubber raft they were riding to Greece flipped in high waves.

The court acquitted the men on charges of causing the deaths through deliberate negligence, and reduced their initial sentence of five years in prison to four years and two months because of good behavior, according to Dogan. The court left open the possibility that the men could file an appeal.

Video

The judgment on Friday prompted immediate reactions on social media, where observers appeared to find the punishment — they had faced a maximum of 35 years — too lenient.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Refugee smuggling is a relatively new type of crime, in comparison with drugs and weapons smuggling, so the appropriate level of penalty is less established, according to Metin Corabatir, a former official at the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the founder of the Asylum and Migration Research Center in Ankara, Turkey’s capital.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“Human conscience wants more serious penalties for those people who risk others’ lives for money, to prevent similar things from happening,” Mr. Corabatir said. “This turned into commerce.”