Ceylan Yeginsu
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/14/world/europe/constant-tide-of-migrants-at-sea-and-at-turkish-cemetery.html
Increased patrols by the Turkish coast guard, plummeting temperatures and stormy seas — all factors that officials believed would lead to fewer crossings — have seemed to have little effect on the numbers.

If anything, there has been a surge in departures in recent weeks, as desperate refugees have taken advantage of the lower prices that smugglers typically charge during winter, when the journey is riskier than it is in summer. Those numbers could rise further, with a new wave of what Turkish officials say is now at least 100,000 refugees fleeing heavy Russian bombing raids and a Syrian government offensive near Aleppo this week.

ROMANIA SERBIA Black Sea KOSOVO BULGARIA MACEDONIA Istanbul GREECE Aegean Sea TURKEY Izmir Athens Rhodes Crete 200 Miles Mediterranean Sea

“We have no choice but to leave now,” said Mahdi, 36, a Syrian refugee and former teacher who prepared to make the journey with his wife and two children, ages 11 months and 3. “It’s already hard to get to Europe, and it’s going to get harder because these countries prefer that we drown than live on their lands.”

On a recent day here, Bilal, 35, a Syrian refugee who gave only his first name, set out for Greece on a rickety wooden boat with his wife and three children, ages 10, 8 and 6. When they set off, the boat, which he said had a capacity of 30 people, was packed with 36 adults and 15 children.

“The motor couldn’t handle the weight, and halfway into the journey it stopped working,” Bilal recalled. “The next thing we knew, the boat had capsized and we were all in the freezing cold water.”

His wife grabbed on to two of their children and attached their life jackets to his. He took the other child, but neither of them could swim and the strong current caused them to drift away from one another, he said.

“We were in the water for over two hours before the coast guard came, and one by one, the people around us died.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Bilal’s son, Ibrahim, 6, started vomiting blood and his daughter lost consciousness, but the family survived. His cousin’s three young children, who were also on the boat, were among the 18 passengers who died.

“Death has become our destiny,” said Kholoud, Bilal’s wife. “Either you die in Syria from shelling or you die at sea.”

At least they survived. The full extent of the humanitarian crisis can be seen at Izmir’s largest morgue, which recently exceeded capacity and is expanding its facility to make more room. Pictures of the deceased migrants show a majority of the victims to be children, some as young as 4 months.

Photo

“The hardest part of this job is receiving the children,” an official at the morgue said without giving his name because he was not authorized to speak to the news media. “They are at the age when they should be splashing about in the sea and playing, but instead their lifeless bodies are being washed up ashore one by one.”

He explained that once the bodies of drowned migrants arrive at the morgue, they are kept for 15 days to allow families time to claim them. If they are not identified within that period, the forensics department carries out an autopsy and records the DNA.

Each body is bathed and shrouded, in line with Islamic rites, before being sent to the cemetery where the imams carry out a full Islamic funeral.

“We decided to give the migrants their own cemetery to make the identification process as easy as possible, even after the bodies are buried,” Mr. Altan, the imam, said. “We have a whole system in place for the families to identify the bodies for up to 100 years.”

European Refugee and Migrant Crisis

The four imams who work at the cemetery carry out an average of five funerals each a day, for Turkish citizens and migrants. They say that they are haunted by the number of unidentified migrant burials they have carried out in the past year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I broke down when I buried a 3-month old baby,” Mr. Altan said. “I couldn’t help myself. It’s hard to accept, because these deaths can be prevented by politicians, but they won’t stop and it’s getting worse.”

After a three-day storm here, hundreds of migrants flocked to various departure points across the coast, desperate to leave before the next wave of bad weather. Qamar, a mother of three, clutched her 5-month-old baby as she stood by the window of a cafe, her eyes fixed on the sea.

“I’m terrified for my children, but this is a gamble we have to take,” she said. “Many people die, but many more make it. God will decide what happens to us.”