Palko Karasz, Dan Bilefsky
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/11/world/europe/migrant-crisis-hungary.html
Denmark, which had temporarily closed a highway running north from the German border to try to contain migrants seeking to travel to Sweden and other countries, said on Thursday that it would not impede their progress. The about-face highlighted confusion over how to apply European Union rules, which require migrants to register or seek asylum in the country of their arrival. Denmark has recently lowered benefits to migrants, and many of those traveling through the country do not want to remain there.

Among the toughest responses to the crisis has been Hungary’s, where the army on Thursday conducted exercises near the Serbian border, which could be preparation for a more active role as thousands continued to pour into the country overnight.

The involvement of the army in policing the border, where a 110-mile fence with razor wire was being built to keep migrants out, is subject to the approval of Parliament this month.

The number of migrants in the area has shown no sign of abating, and Hungarian military officials have said the army will help secure the country’s borders.

Photo

More than 3,000 migrants crossed the border into Austria from Hungary overnight, and another 3,000 or so were expected to arrive in the area on Thursday, the police and Red Cross officials at the border said. Rail service was halted between the two countries on Thursday, Reuters reported, because Austria could not handle the number of migrants crossing the border. It was not clear when service would resume.

The Hungarian police detained 3,321 people for crossing the border illegally on Wednesday, the highest daily figure so far this year, according to data published by the police.

Mr. Juncker on Wednesday issued an impassioned call for countries across the 28-nation bloc to overcome divisions, and he invoked Europe’s historical imperative not to turn its back on the huge number of migrants streaming in.

Mr. Juncker proposed that the European Union accept and distribute 160,000 migrants across its member nations, and he implored Europeans not to forget that their ancestors had also fled hardship, poverty and famine.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Juncker’s plea appeared to have been embraced by Prime Minister Ewa Kopacz of Poland, who was quoted by Reuters as saying that she had heard and understood his message. Responding to comments by the opposition that Poland should not heed the European Union’s calls, she said, “Calls for Polish solidarity is no blackmail.”

“Acting jointly and efficiently in the E.U. is in our interest,” Ms. Kopacz said. “Let’s be decent. President Juncker has reminded us that once, we were also refugees.”

Photo

Yet in Germany, where Chancellor Angela Merkel has been pushing for mandatory quotas, even some supporters of quotas acknowledged that they were unlikely to be accepted across the bloc.

Mr. Juncker’s “latest plan is definitely a move in the right direction,” the left-leaning newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung said in an editorial on Thursday. “He will surely know, however, that the plan is very unlikely to be implemented. The resistance of individual countries may take it apart — and with it the entire European project.”

Such resistance was evident in Hungary, where Janos Lazar, the prime minister’s chief of staff, reiterated the country’s rejection of a quota system. “The government won’t accept the diktat, which several European powers are trying to force onto Hungary,” he said.

In Netherlands, the far-right politician Geert Wilders was even more emphatic, calling the influx of migrants to Europe an “Islamic invasion” in a parliamentary debate on Thursday, Reuters reported, and underlining that country’s struggle over how to respond to the crisis.

“Masses of young men in their 20s with beards singing ‘Allahu akbar’ across Europe,” he was quoted as saying by the news agency. “It’s an invasion that threatens our prosperity, our security, our culture and identity.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Dutch government has indicated a willingness to accept more migrants if the quota system is embraced across the bloc. But, as in many European countries, there has been a fierce debate in the Netherlands about the challenges of immigration, and Mr. Wilders and his Party for Freedom have been citing the crisis to argue that the country risks being overcome by Muslim migrants who do not subscribe to the Netherlands’ vaunted liberal values.

Advocates for migrants argued that the commission’s proposals, however well intentioned, were insufficient to address a growing challenge. The plan amounted to small steps, Iverna McGowan, the acting director of the European Institutions Office at Amnesty International, said on Wednesday, adding that more resources were needed to handle the influx in a humane way.

Ms. McGowan suggested that the commission was misguided in focusing its resources on returning migrants to so-called safe countries — like Albania, Serbia and Turkey that it says are free of persecution, torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, indiscriminate violence and armed conflict. Such a policy might result in people who would otherwise qualify for asylum being sent back to persecution, she said.

Austria and Germany threw open their borders over the weekend, in what was described as a one-time gesture for migrants. So far, however, there has been no attempt to halt the flow of arrivals. Almost all of the migrants who have come from Hungary in recent days have opted to continue on to Germany rather than apply for asylum in Austria.

But a backlash is brewing among far-right anti-immigrant groups in Germany, and it remains unclear how far the country’s capacity can be stretched. Germany expects more than 800,000 asylum seekers to arrive this year, and more than half that number are already there, according to Sigmar Gabriel, the country’s vice chancellor.

“Germany registered 450,000 refugees, including 105,000 in August and 73,000 in the first eight days of September,” Mr. Gabriel told Parliament in Berlin. “There may be more than 100,000 in September.”