Ivan Nechepurenko
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/26/world/europe/ukraine-russia-yuri-grabovsky.html
MOSCOW — A Ukrainian lawyer who was defending one of the Russian servicemen currently on trial in Ukraine was found dead on Friday, a government official said during a news conference in Kiev, Ukraine’s capital.

The official, Anatoly V. Matios, Ukraine’s chief military prosecutor, said the body of the lawyer, Yuri L. Grabovsky, was buried in an abandoned garden south of Kiev with signs of a violent death and a gunshot wound.

Mr. Grabovsky was representing Aleksandr A. Aleksandrov, one of two Russian servicemen detained by the Ukrainian military in the country’s east in May.

Ukrainian officials claimed the two were Russian officers on a military mission in Ukraine, but Moscow said they had resigned from active duty. In a video statement published by the Security Service of Ukraine, Mr. Aleksandrov admitted that he was on a reconnaissance mission in Ukraine at the time.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The politically charged case has further strained ties between Moscow and Kiev.

Two unidentified suspects were detained, and one of them helped investigators find the body. Mr. Matios said one suspect had fake Ukrainian identification documents and credentials.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Grabovsky disappeared on March 5. The captors made him wear a special bracelet, telling him that it would explode if he tried to escape or reach out for help, the military prosecutor said. They also posted messages in Mr. Grabovsky’s Facebook account. One post claimed he had left for Egypt and had to leave Ukraine “against his will,” but he never left the country.

The prosecutor refused to confirm any Russian role in the murder but said it was well planned and well financed. In an interview with the Ukrainian news channel 112.ua, Mr. Matios said the operation had been planned by Russian special services.