Steven Erlanger
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/06/world/europe/dutch-referendum-could-cause-trouble-for-europe.html
The awkwardness for Prime Minister Mark Rutte is that while the Dutch Parliament has ratified the agreement, an instrument of ratification must be deposited with the European Union in Brussels for it to be legal. This gives legal space to the referendum, said Rem Korteweg, a Dutch analyst with the Center for European Reform, a London-based research institution.

If Dutch voters oppose the deal against the vote of their duly elected Parliament, as they are currently expected to do, Mr. Rutte “will have to find a middle road,” Mr. Korteweg said. After all, he noted, the Netherlands currently holds the rotating presidency of the European Council.

Photo

But a “no” vote would be awkward, given that Geert Wilders, the fiercely anti-Brussels opposition politician, is again doing well in opinion polls and is neck and neck with Mr. Rutte’s party. That is one reason Mr. Rutte has kept a certain distance from the referendum, only recently doing media interviews to support ratification, because he does not want to alienate the euroskeptics — even those within his own party — while also trying not to anger his European partners.

A trend toward more “popular democracy” is visible in Europe, with other countries, like Hungary, flirting with referendums. Such direct votes are likely to follow on other issues, meaning European Union decision-making, already complicated, could become even harder, especially if the decisions of democratically elected governments and parliaments cannot be considered binding and final.

Any further public support of euroskepticism would cause concern for Prime Minister David Cameron’s government in Britain, which faces its own fiercely fought referendum on June 23 on whether to stay in the European Union, which Mr. Cameron favors.

The usual problem with referendums is that voters tend to vote emotionally on what bothers them, not necessarily on the merits of the question asked. The European Union is out of favor and so is Ukraine, which remains fairly corrupt even after the Maidan revolution and democratic elections.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Nor will new revelations in the Panama Papers about offshore accounts held by the current Ukrainian president, Petro O. Poroshenko, help those who want to defeat the referendum.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But those revelations could cut both ways, since they also suggest that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, through close friends and intermediaries, has even more money stashed away offshore. Mr. Putin is hardly popular in the Netherlands, given that 193 Dutch passengers were killed in 2014 when Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was shot down by a Russian-made missile fired by Russian-backed Ukrainian separatists. The Dutch public was strongly behind the European Union’s imposing sanctions on Russia for its actions in Ukraine.

Mr. Putin is watching the referendum carefully, since a “no” vote “feeds into his agenda because it shows disunity in Europe on Ukraine policy,” Mr. Korteweg said. Mr. Putin is eager both to keep Crimea, which Russia annexed, and get the European Union to remove the sanctions on Russia. The Italian government, for example, has already questioned whether those sanctions might be reviewed when they are up for renewal in July.

But even the GeenPeil organizers say that the referendum has more to do with anger at the European Union than with Ukraine or Russia. The “yes” campaign is pressing that issue, warning that a “no” would give Mr. Putin what he wants. So whatever the intention of the referendum, the results are likely to be judged differently.

As Carl Bildt, the former Swedish foreign minister, said, “The Dutch referendum on Ukraine tomorrow might be a joke, but one that could have very serious consequences.”