Andrew Higgins
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/23/world/europe/bulgaria-unready-is-poor-host-to-syrians.html
SOFIA, Bulgaria — During a recent visit to a bleak refugee center hastily set up in an abandoned military camp at Harmanli in southern Bulgaria, Iliana Savova, with the Bulgaria Helsinki Committee, a human rights group, shook her head in dismay as she surveyed a muddy, garbage-strewn field dotted with tents, small cabins and clusters of freezing Syrians.

“I am ashamed, and that is a very weak word for what I feel,” said Ms. Savova, who directs the refugee migrant unit for the rights group. “We were a closed country for nearly 50 years and have no culture of receiving immigrants,” she added, referring to Bulgaria’s position as a Soviet satellite state from the end of World War II until 1989.

As the poorest member of the 28-nation European Union, Bulgaria has struggled to provide even rudimentary shelter to Syrian refugees, who began surging into the country from Turkey last summer after neighboring Greece, previously a popular entry point to Europe, built a fence along its border and beefed up controls.

The number of Syrian refugees reaching Bulgaria is still tiny — around 6,500 so far this year — compared with more than two million who have sought shelter in Lebanon, Turkey, Egypt and Jordan. But even that number has severely strained the resources and also volatile politics of a country that received only 1,700 refugees in all of 2012. In just October of this year, the country recorded an influx of 3,626 refugees, nearly 60 percent of them from Syria.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The camp in Harmanli is just one of the places the refugees are housed.

Under scathing criticism for its handling of the refugees from foreign and local organizations, Bulgaria’s Socialist-led government fired the head of the State Agency for Refugees in October and replaced him with a former soldier, Nikolai Tchirpanliev. He has promised to improve conditions, but also says the refugees have complained too much, angering some Bulgarians.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In an interview, he said the flapping tents at Harmanli, where temperatures drop well below freezing at night, would soon all be gone. Emergency financing from the European Union, he said, will help Bulgaria buy the equipment it needs to process refugees so they can move on. The bloc’s rules require that refugees be registered and fingerprinted in the country where they first enter Europe.