Melissa Eddy
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/27/world/europe/heidenau-merkel-refugee-germany.html
Most of the migrants entering Hungary have no plans to stay there, and are instead passing through on their way to Germany or to other countries in the European Union that are seen as more desirable.

Yet many countries, including Germany, are struggling to process the number of asylum seekers, leading to unrest and difficult conditions at overcrowded reception centers.

Photo

“Given what we have all been forced to see here, I would like to recall that the humane and dignified treatment of every individual who comes to us is part of Germany’s national identity,” Ms. Merkel said after visiting the center in Heidenau, near Dresden, that was the site of violent protests over the weekend.

Several hundred neo-Nazis and members of the far-right National Democratic Party threw stones and bottles at the police and shouted “Heil Hitler” during the protests in Heidenau. Ms. Merkel called the clashes and anti-immigrant protests “shameful and offensive.”

Pledging to “do everything possible to make clear that Germany helps where help is needed,” she said that when Parliament reconvened in September, legal changes would be made to help cope with the influx of asylum seekers.

Germany’s ministry for migrants and refugees has already decided to allow any Syrians reaching the country to apply for asylum, even if they have already been registered in another European Union member country. (Asylum seekers must normally apply for recognition as a refugee in the country where they entered the bloc, according to European Union law.)

Ms. Merkel has been a target of criticism from opposition politicians and from the general public over her handling of the migrant crisis. A campaign on social media under the hashtag #Merkelschweigt, which translates to “Merkel stays silent,” denounced what many see as her lack of a clear stance against the attacks.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Earlier on Wednesday, President Joachim Gauck visited a refugee reception center in a western Berlin neighborhood, where he praised the engagement of Germans who have donated their time and energy to welcome the arrivals and help them adapt.

“It is important to me that Germany recognizes the helpful efforts of these hundreds of thousands of people,” Mr. Gauck said. “This is the clear answer to the agitators and arsonists. We will tell them, ‘You do not represent us. We will not tolerate this.’ ”

The violence has continued, however, with the police in the northeastern German city of Parchim reporting that two people with knives had been arrested after entering a refugee home in the city late on Tuesday. The same night, a man threw a burning object at a planned home for 56 refugees in the eastern city of Leipzig, causing a mattress to catch fire, the police reported.

Ms. Merkel’s cabinet approved a measure on Wednesday to double the amount of funding for the care and processing of asylum seekers to 1 billion euros, or about $1.15 billion. Responsibility for processing refugee applications falls to the country’s 16 states and their various municipalities, but with 800,000 people expected to apply for refugee status in Germany this year, local governments are straining to accommodate the influx.