Steven Erlanger
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/14/world/europe/calais-migrant-crisis-british-media.html
Katie Hopkins, a columnist for The Sun, stirred a huge reaction when she wrote in a column: “Rescue boats? I’d use gunships to stop migrants,” whom she compared to cockroaches. More recently, The Sun headlined: “Softy Calais goes ballistic... Frenchies are atrocious!” and reported a “call to send in our Army.”

Lately the focus briefly turned to the man from Sudan, either brave or foolhardy, who walked through the tunnel, and then to the possibility that organized criminal gangs are paying British tourists to smuggle migrants in their cars.

Still, the numbers who manage to get to Britain through the Chunnel are quite small, and the migrants at Calais represent perhaps 1 percent of those who have entered Europe in the last year.

Of course, the main source of illegal migrants is not Calais or any form of people smuggling, but simply the many visitors to Britain who violate their visas. According to Oxford University’s Center on Migration, more than 80 percent of Britain’s illegal migrants were legal to begin with.

The second main cause is also domestic — the large black market in employment. Many migrants want to come here because they speak English, and it is easy to get a job without papers and easier to remain undetected because Britain, unlike most European countries, does not have a national identity card.

These two main drivers of illegal immigration stem from British government policy or ineptitude, not from the perfidious designs of foreigners.

Instead, the government is moving to make Britain less attractive to migrants, though in 2014 it was only the sixth-most attractive European destination for asylum seekers. As a proportion of the population, Britain is much farther down the table, in 18th.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Still, Mr. Cameron wants to cut cash allowances for failed asylum seekers with families and force landlords to check the immigration status of tenants. But only 7 percent of the 5.3 million people claiming state aid do not have British nationality, and the large majority of them are legal migrants.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

All of this cannot be divorced from Britain’s uncertain relationship with the rest of the European Union.

Parliamentary elections in May had an anti-immigration theme, and Mr. Cameron promised during the campaign to hold an in-or-out referendum on British membership in the European Union by the end of 2017.

Many who favor a so-called Brexit say that the only way for Britain to take full control over its borders is to quit the bloc. But then Britain might no longer be allowed to check visas in Calais, which could mean more migrants claiming asylum on British soil.

Mr. Cameron’s real problem is legal migrants from other European Union countries, who are guaranteed freedom of movement and labor. As part of his negotiations on a “new deal” for Britain, Mr. Cameron wants further restrictions on benefits for even legal migrants, hoping to reduce the flow of European Union citizens coming to Britain to live and work. The government is hoping to introduce a four-year waiting period before legal migrants can get certain benefits, like tax credits and child benefits.

But because his European partners are opposed to treaty changes, which are cumbersome and risky, and because all European Union citizens must be treated as equals, Mr. Cameron is now considering a four-year waiting period for such benefits on Britons entering the workforce, as well.

The silly season still has many weeks to run.