Melissa Eddy
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/14/world/europe/germany-migrants-attacks-asylum-seekers-backlash.html
Some of the episodes, such as the arson attacks in the Bavarian town of Vorra and in the eastern town of Tröglitz, have received widespread attention. But there have been many others, including one in Lunzenau in Saxony on July 29, when vandals broke into and deliberately flooded an empty shelter for 50 asylum-seekers by opening the taps in the bathrooms.

Video

That same night, in nearby Dresden, a group of 50 people staged a demonstration against a tent city, hastily set up by the state to temporarily shelter hundreds of asylum-seekers. The Courage Against the Right group has counted 89 such demonstrations this year, many organized by local groups with names like Freital Defends Itself that have sprung up in cities and towns where empty office buildings and hotels have been converted into hostels for new arrivals.

Germany has also witnessed record numbers of people volunteering their time, clothing and money to help the newcomers, and the German government, both nationally and on the state level, has strongly denounced the attacks.

Still, the persistence of such attacks has human rights groups and security officials worried about the wider implications.

Gauri van Gulik, who monitors Europe for Amnesty International in London, said the group had seen a general increase in hate crimes directed against migrants in other European countries, but neither it nor any other group was able to provide solid statistics, in part because the laws vary by country. Germany, for example, has no laws against hate crimes, but counts rightist attacks as politically motivated crimes.

“In Germany, the language has been so classic neo-Nazi we immediately identify it with the types of crimes associated with the far-right,” Ms. van Gulik said.

Elsewhere, the rhetoric has been no more welcoming, and often the official policies are designed to push migrants away. Right-wing parties in Denmark are seeking to clamp down on the number of people coming in, while Hungary is pushing ahead with plans to build a 13-foot-high barbed-wire fence along its border with Serbia, despite criticism from its European Union partners.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Czech government has defended the right of the police to detain illegal migrants. Last week, its president, Milos Zeman, responded to a revolt among migrants held in a guarded facility by saying, “No one invited you here,” and, “If you don’t like it, leave.”

Photo

But since a group called Pegida, the German acronym for Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamization of the West, grew from a cluster of friends into a movement, with organized demonstrations that attracted thousands to weekly marches through Dresden, German security officials have seen more attempts by neo-Nazis to use unease over the migrants to further incite hatred.

Many in this country recall the racist attacks on facilities for asylum-seekers in parts of the former East Germany in the early 1990s, amid high joblessness and a breakdown of social services after that country’s collapse.

President Joachim Gauck, a former pastor and activist from East Germany, last month condemned the attacks on refugee housing as “despicable” and “intolerable.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Weeks of protests outside the former Leonardo Hotel in Freital, which was converted to housing for asylum-seekers, finally ended last week when the police here in Freital banned another demonstration. Since then the situation has calmed, but red-and-white police tape still flutters across the street from the hostel, which houses people from Albania, Morocco and Syria.

Abdel Wahir, 16, has been in Germany only three weeks. During that time, he has witnessed the country at both its best and its ugliest. His sister-in-law has received first-class medical care for an unspecified throat problem he said she developed on the trip here from Afghanistan. But he also witnessed angry protesters shouting racial slurs on the street outside the Leonardo, a former three-star hotel.

A leading television journalist, Anja Reschke, delivered a commentary on the public television network ARD denouncing Internet commentators who she said were helping to incite fear with hate-filled remarks. In the video, which went viral in Germany, Ms. Reschke encouraged Germans who are “not of the opinion that all refugees are freeloaders that should be hunted, burned or gassed” to make their opinion “very clearly known.”

For those like Abdel Wahir, who walked for months and paid smugglers to help him on his journey through Europe, even the angry demonstrations are not enough to encourage him to turn back or seek refuge elsewhere. He said he had not yet had time to learn German, but planned to begin once his application for asylum was accepted, so that he could go on to study and get a job. “Germany still good,” he said in halting English, a broad smile on his face.