The Associated Press
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/12/world/europe/malta-same-sex-marriage-legalized.html
“We live in a society where we can all say ‘we are equal,’” Mr. Muscat said as a celebration erupted outside his office in Valletta, the capital.

The law’s passage is the latest evidence of the transformation of Malta, a once-conservative nation of about 440,000 people where divorce was illegal until 2011.

While abortion remains banned in Malta, adoption by same-sex couples has been legal since civil unions were introduced in 2014. Last year, the number of exclusively civil marriages eclipsed the number of church weddings for the first time.

Archbishop Charles Scicluna had opposed the same-sex marriage law, reflecting the church’s longstanding view that marriage can be between only a man and woman.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“I can decide that a carob and an orange should no longer be called by their name,” Archbishop Scicluna said in a homily a few days after Parliament started debating the legislation. “But a carob remains a carob and an orange remains an orange. And marriage, whatever the law says, remains an eternal union exclusive to a man and a woman.”

The goal of the law, which was pushed by Equality Minister Helena Dalli, was to “modernize the institution of marriage” to extend it to all consenting adult couples.

Mr. Muscat had said it would be “discriminatory” to have separate laws for mixed and same-sex couples. So the amendments to existing laws included eliminating any reference to “husband and wife.” In the term’s place is the gender-neutral “spouse” to cover all situations.

The law also calls for the removal of the terms “father” and “mother,” to be substituted by “parents.” Lesbian couples are distinguished by the terms “the person who gave birth” and “the other parent.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Other changes concern heterosexual marriages: Any reference to “maiden name” is replaced with “surname at birth,” while both spouses can choose which surname to take after marriage.

The coordinator of the Malta Gay Rights Movement, Gabi Calleja, said achieving equality in marriage met the aspirations of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. Most same-sex couples consider marriage to be “the institution that best expresses the commitment and love they have for each other,” Ms. Calleja said.

More than a dozen European countries have legalized same-sex marriage, all in the western part of the Continent. Almost a dozen others, including Italy, have some sort of same-sex unions or civil partnerships, according to the Pew Research Center.