Steven Erlanger, Dan Bilefsky
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/04/world/europe/hungary-train-station-migrant-crisis.html
Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary, where thousands of desperate migrants remain stranded, delivered a series of incendiary comments on Thursday, saying that “Europe’s Christian roots” were being threatened and insisting “the problem is a German problem,” not Europe’s.

10 Miles Danube HUNGARY Keleti railway station Refugee camp Bicscke Budapest SLOVAKIA AUSTRIA Budapest HUNGARY ROMANIA SERBIA CROATIA Danube 10 Miles HUNGARY Keleti railway station Refugee camp Budapest Bicscke UKRAINE SLOVAKIA Budapest AUSTRIA HUNGARY ITALY ROMANIA CROATIA SERBIA

“Nobody would like to stay in Hungary,” he told reporters in Brussels. “All of them would like to go to Germany.”

The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, rejected Mr. Orban’s assertions, saying Germany was doing only what “is morally and legally required” of every European Union country in accepting its fair share of the migrants. She urged others to do their part, with “quotas and rules that are fair and take into account what is possible in each country.”

President François Hollande of France said he had reached agreement with Ms. Merkel on “a permanent and obligatory mechanism” to allocate migrants across the bloc, saying, “I believe that today what exists is no longer enough. We will need to go further.” But there is no consensus. Mr. Orban rejected the idea of mandatory quotas, as did the Slovak government, which said it would accept only Christians, and in small numbers.

Photo

Prime Minister David Cameron of Britain at first rejected the idea of mandatory quotas, but late Thursday said that “as a father I felt deeply moved” by the boy’s death and that Britain would fulfill its “moral responsibilities.” He gave no details, though there were suggestions it might take more Syrians from camps in the region.

While politicians searched for answers, migrants continue to pile up in Hungary, particularly at the 19th century Keleti railroad station in the capital, Budapest. After a day of turmoil and a night sleeping on platforms and floors, nearly 500 migrants trapped there were finally allowed to board a train.

Fights broke out in some train cars as migrants pushed and clawed their way inside, believing they were on their way, at last, to Austria and Germany.

“Where is this train going?” asked a Syrian man. “This isn’t going to Germany, is it?”

“No, this is a local, man,” someone answered as he walked past the train. “It’s going to the camps.” That was a reference to reports the migrants would be sent to reception centers to register and file asylum requests, a procedure that can take months.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

About a half-hour to the west of Budapest, the reports and rumors turned out to have some truth. An intercity train with about 500 migrants on board was stopped in the town of Bicske, the site of an already overwhelmed camp. Buses idled nearby, seemingly waiting to take the migrants to a Hungarian camp.

All Hungarians were told they could get off, but non-Hungarians remained locked inside the train without drinking water. Riot police officers fended off migrants hanging out of windows and chanting that they wanted to go to Austria and Germany.

Photo

The migrants initially refused to get off, believing they were being tricked by the authorities. “No camp, no camp,” people shouted from the train.

Eventually, the migrants left the train and huddled on the platform, kept there by the police, who blocked the exits.

Hungary has emerged as a potent symbol of Europe’s struggle to come to terms with the migration crisis, as well as its lack of preparedness to cope with an influx of migrants from Africa, the Middle East and elsewhere.

The migrants have no desire to stay in the country, where Mr. Orban’s center-right government has made it abundantly clear they are unwelcome, and would prefer to travel to Germany.

Under European Union rules, however, migrants are supposed to file for asylum in the country where they enter, before moving on to their final destination. In practice, the migrants are often given no final destinations and become the responsibility of the country that registered them.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

After first encouraging migrants to pass through the country, he changed course on Thursday, following the letter of the law while complaining that the system was broken.

Video

“We Hungarians are full of fear,” he added. “People in Europe are full of fear, because we see that European leaders, among them the prime ministers, are not capable of controlling the situation.”

Germany has promised to be generous in accepting asylum-seekers, especially from Syria, but made it clear that it cannot accept everyone forever, and that the burden must be shared by other E.U. states.

To try to get around the problem, the president of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, whose proposal for mandatory quotas was rejected in June, is considering allowing some countries to provide money instead of taking migrants. The European Commission is preparing proposals for setting up reception and screening centers in Italy and Greece and is making another effort at pushing member states to share the burden.

But in a fashion typical of the bloc, the process is cumbersome and slow. Only after a preparatory meeting of interior and justice ministers on Sept. 14 will a summit meeting of European leaders be considered.

The numbers, of course, are not the biggest issue — for Mr. Orban and some others, it is the cultural and religious dimension that troubles them.

His country, he said, was being “overrun” with asylum-seekers, most of whom are Muslim. “That is an important question, because Europe and European culture have Christian roots,” he wrote in the German newspaper, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung.

Unaware of what was going on in Bicske, migrants continued to surge into Keleti after the authorities relaxed their cordon. Officers “left and let people come into the station, but now they’re back,” said Mohammad al-Bekaai, a 23-year-old Syrian. “They’re going to pen these people inside and take them to the camp.”

A handful managed to get onto the next few trains headed west, but they were removed at Bicske and joined the few who had left the morning train and moved onto the platform.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some, realizing the authorities were determined to send them to reception centers, were resigned. “Even if they take us to the camp, it’s better than staying in the station,” said Ali al-Taai, a Syrian from Deir al-Zour. “I’ve been there for six days without food and water. I’ve had enough.”