The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/08/world/europe/refugee-migrant-crisis-asylum-seekers-germany.html
Companies can help provide training. Cities still have to find housing that suits extended families so they can mix with the existing population, and avoid creating ghettos.

MICHAEL KIMMELMAN

Q. What are the reasons for Angela Merkel’s decision to welcome refugees? How much is humanitarian, how much a need for younger people (taxpayers), how much a desire for labor — cheap and otherwise? How much is prestige, how much World War II guilt? — Isa Mara Lando, Rio de Janeiro

A. You have correctly identified the various motives; all of them likely play a part in Ms. Merkel’s decisions. In addition, I would note aspects of her biography: Ms. Merkel is the daughter of a Lutheran minister and she grew up in communist East Germany.

Photo

The tone of her remarks since Germany received thousands of asylum seekers trapped in Hungary in early September has reflected a particular German obligation to offer asylum to those in danger that was not offered to Jews and other victims of the Nazis. But Ms. Merkel’s words also reflect a concern and sympathy for her fellow humans that was surely part of her upbringing. ALISON SMALE

Q. Are all the refugees arriving in Europe illegally, dealing with smugglers using unsafe boats? Is there no legal, safe way for them to reach Europe? Do countries who feel an obligation to accept them also have an obligation to provide one? — David Barnert, Albany, N.Y.

A. Nearly all asylum seekers arrive illegally, in the sense that they do not have official entry visas. But the United Nations refugee convention states that people who face a clear danger of persecution or threat to their lives have a right to seek protection in another country, even when they do not have prior approval to enter that country.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

All asylum seekers can, in theory, apply in their home country for visas at the embassy of the country that they want to enter, but this is a long and laborious process. It also tends to weed out people who do not have a legitimate case for asylum; migrants who are seeking better economic opportunities usually prefer to take their chances and pay smugglers to get them to Europe before applying.

Some of these migrants might believe that once they are in a country, it will be very difficult for that country to get them to leave if they are not granted asylum. Lots of people are rejected, but few are deported. And the process can take years.

Countries that are party to the United Nations convention are obliged to examine the asylum claim of anyone who shows up at their border asking for refuge, but they are not obliged to provide safe passage to that border. It is up to the refugee to get to wherever he or she wants to go. ANDREW HIGGINS