Alissa J. Rubin
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/29/world/europe/hundreds-of-migrants-try-to-clamber-onto-trains-and-cross-english-channel.html
The migrants in Calais now number more than 3,000, according to local volunteers, and some say the numbers are even higher. In past years, the population of migrant camps at Calais — and there have been successive settlements in the last decade or so — did not exceed 2,000, according to aid workers.

Bernard Cazeneuve, the French interior minister, said that in July alone there had been 4,500 efforts by migrants to cross the Channel at Calais.

The migrants there are now confined to a squalid camp with few toilets and little water on the edge of the small city. During a recent visit, it seemed most of those in the camps were Afghans, Ethiopians, Eritreans, Syrians and Sudanese.

Most plan to seek asylum when they arrive in Britain or ask for protection as refugees. They say they are choosing to go there because they have relatives there, speak some English or believe they are more likely to get housing once they apply for asylum. It is not clear whether that belief is true. In Britain, as in many other European countries, misgivings about immigration, and sometimes outright hostility, are now expressed openly by mainstream politicians.

The migrants most anxious to get across recently have been the Eritreans, of whom there are a large number in the camp, said Muriel Merlin, a volunteer from Calais who works in the camp.

“It’s not a surprise,” she said of the high numbers trying to cross overnight on Monday. She said that because the French and British authorities, who work together to protect the port, have put up much more substantial barriers, the migrants are trying to find a way to board the trains.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“They go on ‘en masse’ to have more strength,” Ms. Merlin said, when asked why they would all go together when they knew that they would most likely be turned back.

“They absolutely want to go to England,” she said, adding, “Perhaps they are hoping to show their determination.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In the past, the journey was easier, in part because the port itself was less protected. It was possible to sneak onto the ferries that go from Calais to Dover or to climb aboard the trucks as they waited to drive onto a train.

The British home secretary, Theresa May, met with Mr. Cazeneuve in London on Tuesday and committed to spending an additional 7 million pounds, or $11 million, on security measures on the French and British sides of the Channel, according to a report by Agence France-Presse. The British have already committed £15 million to the effort, the report added.

Trying to stow away on a car train can be very dangerous, and eight migrants have died in the attempt since the beginning of June. Yet many migrants consider that far less hazardous than, say, crossing the Mediterranean in a flimsy boat. And for many, it seems worth the risk.

When asked how often he had tried, an Eritrean man recently interviewed on the edge of Calais said: “Every night. Maybe tonight I will be lucky.”