James Kanter
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/18/world/europe/europe-grapples-with-plan-to-return-refugees-from-greece-to-turkey.html
If Mr. Davutoglu makes objections, the 28 national leaders could meet again during the day to consider adjusting their positions.

At stake in Brussels is not only Europe’s ability to manage one of the most pressing crises of recent times, but also the influence of Ms. Merkel, who helped develop the plan at a time when much of the rest of the Continent — and a substantial portion of her own country — had turned against her policy of welcoming refugees.

Photo

Before Mr. Davutoglu’s arrival, the leaders had grappled with the biggest hurdles threatening a plan that was sprung on them by Ms. Merkel at a summit meeting early this month.

With humanitarian groups saying such a plan would violate international law on refugees, and national governments raising their own concerns, the European leaders had faced an especially tricky challenge in finding consensus even as the flow of people toward Europe continues.

Tens of thousands of migrants are backed up in squalid camps in Greece after Macedonia closed its border crossing, blocking the way north.

In the session on Thursday, the leaders agreed to revise the proposal to address concerns about the plan. Refugees would be returned to Turkey with the assistance of the United Nations refugee agency, and each applicant for asylum in Greece would be “processed individually,” according to the proposal.

Even so, the European Union would still pledge to resettle one Syrian from a camp in Turkey in exchange for each Syrian who used an irregular route, like crossing the Aegean Sea, to reach Greece.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That system to exchange refugees was “abhorrent” and showed that “this deal remains at its core both legally and morally unsound,” Iverna McGowan, the head of the European institutions office for Amnesty International, said Thursday.

Another sticking point was ensuring that Cyprus did not veto a resumption of negotiations over Turkey’s eventual membership in the European Union. The talks were one of Ankara’s conditions. Unless the Turks take certain steps, like opening its ports to Cypriot ships, “we can do nothing,” President Nicos Anastasiades of Cyprus told reporters earlier on Thursday.

Leaders revised the proposal to give Cyprus further reassurances that there would be no immediate resumption of negotiations on European Union membership for Turkey, which has occupied the northern half of Cyprus since 1974. But the leaders confirmed they were prepared to give about $6.6 billion in aid to help organizations look after the nearly three million migrants already in Turkey.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The talks with Mr. Davutoglu later Friday still could be lengthy, forcing leaders to talk into the weekend or to schedule yet another meeting. Turkey has sought to drive a hard bargain with demands including an acceleration of talks on its membership of the bloc and, importantly for Ankara, visa-free travel for its citizens across most of Europe starting this summer.

In their proposal the Europeans said visa-free travel would depend on Turkey meeting several conditions.

Reflecting a general queasiness that many Europeans feel in making those concessions to Turkey, which has taken an authoritarian turn under President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the Belgian prime minister, Charles Michel, told reporters earlier on Thursday that Europeans should not succumb to “what at times seems like blackmail” to reach a deal.

The plan brought to the surface a bewildering range of issues, including when any system of returning refugees to Turkey should start.

Greece does not yet have the legal infrastructure, including sufficient numbers of judges, to ensure that migrants are given a fair hearing before they are sent back to Turkey.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Yet waiting more than a few days to put such a system in force could create a powerful incentive for some of the millions of migrants currently in Turkey to make even more determined efforts to reach Europe.

“We all know obviously that if matters take too long then it will indeed have this pull effect, but we have not yet specified any specific date or day,” Ms. Merkel told the news conference.

There are also widespread concerns that the deal with Turkey will be of limited long term value if migrants scramble for alternatives, including boat trips across the Mediterranean Sea to reach Italian islands like Lampedusa or the island state of Malta, which is also a member of the European Union.