Robert Mackey, Open Source
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/08/world/europe/hungarian-fashion-photographer-defends-migrant-chic-spread.html
As dramatic images of migrants being repelled at the border with Hungary flooded the news media last month, a fashion photographer in Budapest, Norbert Baksa, had an idea: Why not use the backdrop of the crisis — the barbed-wire enclosures, the clashes with the police — to display luxury clothing brands?

It was not until this week, when the photographer shared the results of his “migrant chic” fashion shoot with the world, posting 13 images on his website and promoting it on Twitter, that he discovered a very large number of other people found the whole idea deeply objectionable.

Photo

Within hours of uploading his work to the web — a spread he titled “Der Migrant” that features a model wearing head scarves and shirts that seem to ride up or come undone, à la Marianne, as she struggles with the law — Mr. Baksa found himself ridiculed on social networks and in dozens of critical articles from across the globe.

As Nathalie Hof observed in the online journal OAI13, the images that attracted the most attention showed the model, Monika Jablonczky, pausing to “take a selfie, leaning against the border fence, in her designer clothes, with a phone which bears the distinct logo of Chanel.” That the model’s shirt is half open drew particular ire, given the cultural and faith backgrounds of many of those fleeing wars in the Middle East.

The criticism was so intense that Mr. Baksa, who has shot for Elle, Playboy and Cosmopolitan, felt compelled to defend his work, and motives, in a long note posted on his website. “Regarding the reactions,” the photographer wrote, “I hoped people would realize that the situation is very complex and see that they are taking stands based on partial or biased information. I do not understand how people can take a clear stand (pro or con) while we are flooded with contradictory information through the media, so no one has extensive knowledge of the situation as a whole. This is exactly what we wanted to picture: you see a suffering woman, who is also beautiful and despite her situation, has some high quality pieces of outfit and a smartphone.”

Photo

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The photographs were “not intended to glamourize this clearly bad situation,” he said, but “to draw the attention to the problem and make people think about it.” The images, Mr. Baksa added, were based on news photographs of actual events taken in recent weeks at the Hungarian border, many of which provoked outrage at the authorities’ treatment of migrants. Mr. Baksa did suggest, however, that he accepted the Hungarian government’s characterization of some of those caught up in clashes as “aggressive migrants or terrorists.”

Despite his best efforts to explain, the vast majority of the responses to Mr. Baksa on social networks came from viewers who urged him, essentially, to quit while he was behind and stop trying to make “migrant chic” happen.

Photo

Among those unconvinced by the photographer’s rationale was his compatriot Szabolcs Panyi of Hungary’s Index.hu.

Meanwhile, images of actual migrants, who are still risking their lives crossing the Mediterranean in the thousands, continue to portray a considerably less sexy reality.