Sewell Chan
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/10/world/europe/europe-refugee-crisis.html
Prime Minister Tihomir Oreskovic of Croatia said at a news conference on Wednesday: “The message is clear. Illegal migrants will no longer pass along this route.”

Mr. Oreskovic said the agreement with Turkey had reduced the incentive for migrants to head to Europe. Like other leaders, he attributed the problem to traffickers who lure migrants into taking dangerous voyages across the Aegean Sea. “In what way can we destroy this business model?” he asked.

Iceland Schengen area countries pol. Ger. France POLand Area of detail Spain AUStria HUNGary croatia romania Slavonski Brod Serbia slovenia bulgaria Idomeni MACEDONIA Thessaloniki greece Turkey ITALY Athens

The decision by the four Balkan countries does not affect regular visitors, like tourists or business travelers, but is an effort to stop undocumented migrants from passing through the countries to seek asylum elsewhere. Very few have applied for asylum in the Balkan countries.

The shutdown of the migrant corridor is consistent with an effort by Brussels to restore order after the asylum system broke down last year.

Under the agreement with Turkey, any unauthorized migrant arriving in Greece will be automatically sent back to Turkey, and for each Syrian sent back, the European Union will resettle a Syrian refugee from Turkey.

The European Union has also pledged to expand humanitarian aid to help Turkey deal with the 2.7 million Syrian migrants living there; to expedite visa-free travel for Turks; and to reopen long-stalled negotiations over Turkey’s application to join the 28-nation bloc.

Human rights groups, however, have objected to the European Union’s proposed deal with Turkey, saying that returning asylum-seeking migrants en masse without first assessing their legal applications for refuge violates international law. About 2,000 migrants a day are entering Greece, observers have reported.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Lots of misery here at Idomeni border as 13K are trapped, 2 days of rains forecast,” Peter Bouckaert, the emergencies director at Human Rights Watch, wrote on Twitter on Wednesday morning, referring to the Greek village near the Macedonian border, where people have been pouring through in recent months under increasingly miserable conditions.

As of Wednesday night, Mr. Bouckaert said, migrants appeared to be leaving Idomeni for other points within Greece as word of the blocked route through the Balkans rippled through the encampments.

The situation in much of the region seemed wretched, though not nearly as bad as the scenes of migrants stranded at the Budapest train station and at a camp in Calais, France, that became known as the Jungle.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In Slovenia, about 460 of the nearly 478,000 migrants who have entered the country since October have applied for asylum there; the rest moved northward, with ambitions of reaching Germany, Sweden and other countries viewed as friendlier to asylum seekers.

In Croatia, 408 migrants are stuck in a camp in a small northern town, Slavonski Brod. “We’re in the process of defining the terms of their return to Greece,” Croatia’s interior minister, Vlaho Orepic, said on Wednesday, without further explanation.

United Nations officials say there are around 2,000 migrants in Serbia and 1,500 in Macedonia.

In northern Macedonia, 437 of them were stranded, unable to enter Serbia but unwilling to return to the squalid conditions of the reception center in the northern village of Tabanovce, where some 1,000 people were stuck. Many were women and children.

Greece remains the largest bottleneck. Around 34,000 migrants are scattered around the country, on islands close to the Turkish coast; in the capital, Athens; and in the country’s second-largest city, Thessaloniki.

The European Union has given tacit approval to the actions of these countries as it strives to restore order to the asylum-seeking process and to restore the integrity of the Schengen area, the 26-nation passport-free travel zone that is one of the bloc’s most tangible accomplishments.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Slovenia and Croatia are members of the European Union, and Serbia and Macedonia hope to join. Of the four countries, only Slovenia is part of the Schengen area. (Greece is also part of Schengen.)

Natasha Bertaud, a spokeswoman for the European Commission, the European Union’s executive body, said Slovenia’s decision to block refugees was part of the effort to restore order.

“What this means is that third-country nationals who do not satisfy the entry conditions into the Schengen area, or who have not made an asylum request despite having had the opportunity to do so, will not be given entry into Slovenia,” Ms. Bertaud said at a news conference.

The Slovenian policy was a step toward ending the “wave-through approach,” she added.