Andrew Higgins
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/16/world/europe/migrant-crisis-europe.html
“Without a doubt Turkey plays a key role in this situation,” Ms. Merkel said. “Most war refugees who come to Europe travel via Turkey. We won’t be able to order and stem the refugee movement without working together with Turkey.”

The meeting began shortly after officials from Turkey and the European Commission, the bloc’s executive arm, reached a preliminary agreement during overnight talks in Ankara, the Turkish capital, that seeks to slow the migration to Europe.

The deal, Mr. Tusk said, is “devoted to our goal of stemming migration flows via Turkey to the E.U.” He declined to say how much money Turkey would receive in return, saying only that the agreement was based on the principle of “You help us and we help you. It is that simple.”

Germany and the European Union as a whole are hoping that Turkey will curb migrant traffic to the Greek islands, some just a few miles from the Turkish coast, and also take back asylum seekers whose claims for refugee status in the European Union are rejected.

Photo

As an inducement, leaders pledged to increase “substantially” European financing for Turkey and also to speed up visa-free access to Europe for Turkish citizens — a politically delicate issue at a time when most governments are scrambling for ways to limit, not expand, access to their countries.

The French president, François Hollande, voicing widespread concern about a possible influx of Turks, told reporters early Friday that visa liberalization “should not lead to people coming from Turkey without us knowing their identity for sure.” He said he had “insisted” that Europe could relax its visa rules for Turkey only “on a very specific and monitored basis.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Asked about the amount of aid to go to Turkey, which had been asking for billions of euros, Mr. Hollande said no figure had yet been agreed upon. But he added that any money should be used chiefly to improve the lives of refugees in Turkey and to finance the establishment of receiving centers for them.

Turkey, relishing the leverage that Europe’s desperation has given it, has driven a hard bargain, with Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu telling Turkish television that his country would not take back migrants rejected for asylum in Europe unless Turks were allowed to travel to Europe without visas.

Under political pressure at home to curb an influx of asylum seekers to Germany, which now expects 1.5 million migrants in all this year, Ms. Merkel has increasingly looked to Turkey as a possible solution and is to travel there on Sunday to appeal for help from President Recep Tayyip Erdogan.

That will follow a visit to Turkey on Wednesday and Thursday by Frans Timmermans, a former Dutch foreign minister, who has been also been pushing for a deal with Ankara on the migration issue.

Diplomats in Brussels say that one proposal under discussion would call for Turkey to set up camps funded and supervised by the European Union where asylum seekers hoping for refuge in Europe would be registered and processed.

This revives an idea put forward more than a decade ago by Tony Blair, when he was the British prime minister, for the establishment of migrant reception centers in Africa and the Middle East that would effectively move offshore the processing of asylum claims. The plan, which Amnesty International condemned as “inherently unlawful,” never got off the ground.

But as European governments grope for ways to deal with the current crisis, keeping asylum seekers outside Europe would also solve what has become a major headache: what to do with the tens of thousands of people in Europe whose asylum claims have been rejected but who refuse to leave. In the second quarter of this year, according to Frontex, the European Union border agency, only 43,000 of the 72,168 failed asylum candidates left as ordered.

European Union interior ministers last week agreed on tougher measures to ensure the swift deportation of migrants who do not qualify for refugee status, including the “use of detention as a legitimate measure of last resort.”

Germany’s Parliament on Thursday toughened its own policy toward failed asylum-seekers as part of a package of measures that could help Ms. Merkel tamp down protests in her own conservative camp that Germany’s considerable resources are being overextended by the crisis.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The package means that Kosovo, Albania and Montenegro will now be considered “safe,” and almost none of their citizens therefore eligible for asylum in Germany. Other measures will cut cash benefits paid to asylum claimants, reduce the amount of time to process claims and speed deportation of those who do not get permission to stay.

“I have looked very carefully at the figures,” Ms. Merkel said, “and Germany is nowhere near the top” in sending home those refused asylum.

Elizabeth Collett, director of the Migration Policy Institute Europe, a research group in Brussels, said the renewed emphasis on tougher border controls was in part “just political theater,” because leaders find it “much easier to agree on the need for strong borders” than on what to do with refugees once they arrive.

“There is a need to demonstrate action, so there is a lot of talk without the details being worked through,” she said.

Hungary, which faced strong criticism over the summer for using force to prevent asylum seekers from breaching a fence along its southern border, is now moving swiftly to enhance its own border security. In a letter to European Union leaders this week inviting them to the summit meeting, Mr. Tusk, a former Polish prime minister, warned that Europe faced even “bigger waves” of asylum seekers once winter passes, and he called for tighter controls.

In an effort to bolster Europe’s defenses, leaders agreed to expand the financing and authority of Frontex, which currently has no guards, vehicles, boats or aircraft of its own. Last week, the agency appealed to European Union member states to provide 775 border guards to help ensure that all asylum seekers are properly identified and registered. Only 48, however, have so far been offered.