Liz Alderman
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/24/world/europe/macedonia-afghan-migrant-crisis.html
The European commissioner for migration, Dimitris Avramopoulos, and the Dutch minister for migration, Klaas Dijkhoff, urged countries along the Balkan route “to prepare the necessary contingency planning to be able to address humanitarian needs.” The European Commission is also ready to offer support “in case of a humanitarian crisis both outside and within the E.U.,” they said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Also Tuesday, Belgium said it would impose police checks on its southern border to prevent the possible influx of thousands of migrants as a French court considers whether to tear down much of a notorious migrant camp in the northern city of Calais. The Belgian interior minister, Jan Jambon, said the move was needed “to prevent the erection of tent encampments in our country similar to those in Calais.”

About 10,000 migrants have massed in and around Idomeni since the weekend, when the Macedonian police, buttressed by reinforcements from Austria, Croatia, Serbia and Slovenia, blocked Afghans and all other migrants from countries other than Syria and Iraq from entering.

Photo

Macedonia took steps after Croatia determined that hundreds of Afghan migrants crossing its border had not come to Europe to escape conflict and sent them back to Serbia, Nikola Poposki, Macedonia’s foreign minister, said in a telephone interview. Serbia in turn sent hundreds of Afghans back to Macedonia, where around 800 Afghan citizens are now stuck at the border, he added.

Scores of buses from the Piraeus port, near Athens, which were carrying more migrants who days earlier had made a perilous crossing from Turkey, were stuck at several gas stations on a highway running to the northern border.

On Tuesday, a Greek government official with knowledge of the operation said the police were boarding buses at the gas stations and separating out Syrians and Iraqis. The police removed Afghan citizens and placed them on buses to return to one of several migrant detention centers in Athens, which are already saturated, including a new half-built center outside the capital.

Photo

The backup of migrants was increasing the strain on Greece, which has become a focal point in the crisis. European Union officials have demanded that Athens take steps to tighten screening and slow the flow of refugees, many of whom are hoping to reach Germany, or risk suspension from the Schengen zone.

Greece, which is reeling from a prolonged economic crisis, has protested that it lacks the funds to carry out the task adequately and was overwhelmed by the sheer numbers of people crossing the Aegean Sea from Turkey, despite a pledge from Ankara to curb migrant flows in exchange for 3 billion euros, or about $3.3 billion, in aid from the European Union.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Only in the past two weeks has Greece opened several so-called hot spot facilities on the islands where migrants are most likely to arrive. But Athens has faced a sharp outcry from locals on some of those islands, such as Kos and Leros, who say they fear that the new centers, which are used to register and hold migrants until their applications are sorted out, will turn into permanent holding camps.

Greece is the most popular entry point into Europe for hundreds of thousands of migrants from Iraq, Syria and elsewhere. More than 56,000 migrants arrived in Greece by sea in January alone, 10 times the number in the same period last year. In the first three weeks of this year, at least 113 people died trying to make the sea crossing to Europe, the International Organization for Migration said, compared with 94 a year earlier.

Underlining the risks of the influx for Greece, the president of the European Parliament warned this week that the country risked becoming a “parking lot” for migrants unless the European Union moved to put in effect a plan to resettle thousands of migrants stuck there and in Italy.