Dan Bilefsky
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/19/world/europe/hungarys-plan-to-build-fence-to-deter-migrants-is-criticized.html
Photo

LONDON — The European Union was supposed to be about breaking down borders and barriers. But critics say that message appears to have been lost on Hungary, which drew international condemnation this week for its government’s plans to erect a fence along the Serbian border to keep out migrants.

“We don’t want to live in an Auschwitz,” Aleksandar Vucic, Serbia’s prime minister, said on state television on Thursday, a day after Hungary unveiled a proposal to build the 13-foot-high fence along its 109-mile southern border with Serbia. Mr. Vucic said building walls and fences was a misguided way to deter the tens of thousands of asylum seekers, buffeted by war and conflict in Syria, Africa and elsewhere, who are determined to find refuge in the Union and have increasingly sought entry through the western Balkans.

The plans to build a fence have touched a nerve in Europe, where debate is raging over how to handle the soaring numbers of migrants and as far-right parties in Britain, France, Greece and elsewhere have gained popularity and votes by railing against immigrants.

The plan has attracted particular ire in Serbia, which has been undertaking tough political and economic changes in hopes of joining the European Union after years of isolation from the West following the bloody Balkan wars of the 1990s.

The plan for the fence — coming from Hungary, a former Communist country that was itself once behind the Iron Curtain — was also criticized by the United Nations refugee agency and the European Union. “We have only just torn down walls in Europe; we should not be putting them up,” said Natasha Bertaud, a spokeswoman for the European Commission. While member countries have the right to secure their borders, Ms. Bertaud emphasized that they could not flout international law by, for example, turning away migrants who are entitled to protection.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Nevertheless, Hungary has insisted that building the fence is legally within its rights, and that it is necessary to help it meet a serious migration challenge. Last year, the country received 41,215 applications for asylum, including 20,910 from citizens of Kosovo, 8,560 from Afghanistan and 6,630 from Syria, according to data from Eurostat. That was 7 percent of the total asylum applications received by the 28 members of the European Union.