Jesse Coburn
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/21/world/europe/legislation-gives-hope-to-girl-who-shared-plight-with-merkel.html
An overhaul of residency laws would allow certain under-age asylum seekers who have attended German schools and have been assimilated the opportunity to stay in the country permanently, along with their parents.

For those foreigners, the legislation “finally offers the prospect of a lawful and humanitarian residency,” said Aydan Ozoguz, the country’s commissioner for immigration, refugees and integration, in a statement. These changes, Ms. Ozoguz continued, would “conclude years of uncertainty for many of those and their families who have temporary visas and have long since found their new homes here.”

Reem counts herself among those recent arrivals who feel at home in Germany. “I’ve been treated well,” she said, perched on a pink bedspread populated by stuffed animals.

She, her two younger siblings and her parents live in an anonymous housing block outside the city center. The apartment was provided by the government. Reem’s parents are prohibited from working while their asylum application is under review, and the family lives on a small government subsidy.

Reem, speaking in fluent German after five years in the country, said she wished to study and to live permanently in Germany. She wants to work as an interpreter or English teacher so she can help others overcome communication barriers that she herself knows well. “I see how needed it is when immigrants arrive here,” Reem said.

She was born in a refugee camp in Baalbek, Lebanon, in 2000. Her birth was two months premature, and she has a shortened Achilles tendon and cerebral palsy that has partly paralyzed her left side and made walking difficult.

Photo

Her father, Atef Sahwil, struggled to pay her medical bills on what he made as a welder. In the summer of 2006, as the war between Israel and Hezbollah upended their lives in Baalbek, the Sahwils fled to Syria for a few months, living in another refugee camp. After the family returned to Lebanon, Reem broke her right leg in a car accident.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It had to be my healthy leg,” she said, laughing and pointing to a thick scar on her forehead, another reminder of the crash.

After years of insufficient care, the Sahwils applied for a visa for medical treatment in Germany in 2010 and flew to Düsseldorf for an operation on Reem’s back. Her family paid for the trip with money lent by Mr. Sahwil’s employer, as well as with donations from the Red Cross, relatives and neighbors. “We approached strangers, just knocking on the door and asking for help,” Reem said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

It was the first of many medical procedures she would undergo in Germany, prompting her family to stay and apply for asylum. “Papa just couldn’t deal with it anymore,” Reem said of the family’s difficult life in Lebanon.

The Sahwils first applied for asylum in Sweden, but their application was denied because European Union regulations stipulate that the first union country that a refugee enters is responsible for processing the application.

The family then returned to Germany and submitted an application for asylum. Reem said that although the application was rejected — as she told Ms. Merkel during their tearful encounter — the family is appealing for additional consideration.

Regardless of the result of those efforts, Roland Methling, the mayor of Rostock, has said he will do everything in his power to help families in his jurisdiction like the Sahwils remain in Germany. “Germany, Europe and especially Palestine needs figures like Reem,” Mr. Methling wrote in an email.

Reem attends a school with accommodations for disabled students. Her summer vacation began this week.

“When I’m in school, I feel like I’m doing something for my life,” she said. She said that her favorite subjects are English and German, in which she was the only student in her class this year to receive a grade of 1, equivalent to an A.

Reem was one of several students invited to participate in the public forum with the chancellor last Wednesday, part of a discussion series called Living Well in Germany.

“Politics is sometimes hard,” the chancellor said, a remark that some commentators have said showed a lack of empathy. Others have applauded Ms. Merkel’s candor — including Reem herself.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“She was honest, and I find that good,” Reem said.