Aurelien Breeden
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/21/world/europe/salah-abdeslam-paris-suspect-planned-to-restart-something-in-brussels-officials-say.html
“We are sure that for the moment we have found more than 30 people involved in the terrorist attacks in Paris, but we are sure there are others,” he said.

In addition to the assailants who died on the night of the attacks, 18 people who are suspected of assisting the attackers are detained in six countries, and at least two others are still at large.

François Molins, the Paris prosecutor, said on Saturday that Mr. Abdeslam had told Belgian investigators that he wanted to detonate a suicide vest at the national soccer stadium near Paris on the night of the attacks, but that he “backed out.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

It is still unclear whether investigators believe the comments attributed to Mr. Abdeslam. Mr. Molins said that Mr. Abdeslam’s initial statements needed to be treated cautiously and that the investigation would continue.

On Nov. 13, a team of Islamic State assailants carried out bombings and shootings in Paris and its northern suburb of St.-Denis, killing 130 people and wounding hundreds at a concert hall, in cafes and restaurants, and at the stadium, the Stade de France.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Abdeslam, who is thought to be the only surviving member of that team, played a “key role” in the preparation and logistics of the attacks, Mr. Molins said, but his exact actions on the night of Nov. 13 are unclear.

Mr. Abdeslam was arrested Friday in the Molenbeek section of Brussels, the Belgian capital, after an international manhunt that had lasted four months. He was charged with terrorist activities and participation in terrorist murder and is detained in a high-security prison in the northern Belgian town of Bruges.

Mr. Abdeslam is being questioned by Belgian investigators, but is wanted for trial in France. Sven Mary, Mr. Abdeslam’s Belgian lawyer, has said his client would fight his extradition to France, a tactic that is expected to delay, but not block, the process.

Mr. Mary also told the Belgian public broadcaster RTBF on Sunday that he intended to file a complaint against the Paris prosecutor for a violation of judicial secrecy laws, because he had revealed comments made by Mr. Abdeslam to Belgian investigators.