Steven Erlanger
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/04/world/europe/migrants-evade-security-to-enter-tunnel-in-france.html
On Wednesday, an Eritrean migrant was found dead in the tunnel, apparently hit by a freight train, the police said, the latest of 13 migrants killed this year in the area, most of them at the Eurotunnel site. Three were killed in September.

European Refugee and Migrant Crisis

Train drivers of the C.G.T. union wrote an open letter last week saying, “Today, we are afraid. Afraid to start, afraid to finish, afraid to drive,” as well as “afraid to hit, smash, electrocute,” according to The Associated Press. The letter, addressed to the French government, asked for a solution that does not involve the use of force.

“Hitting a refugee with your train, seeing people die on the rails, is really something traumatizing,” a C.G.T. spokesman, Hervé Gomet, said Friday on France Info radio. He said the problem would not be solved by putting up barbed wire fences.

The British government has given more money and security fencing to go around the French side of the complex, which has a perimeter of 17 miles. There are more security and police officers at the site to prevent break-ins and illegal entries.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In a statement, Eurotunnel said that “we understand the emotion described in this letter.” Eurotunnel set up a support group of psychologists for the drivers and staff members at the end of July, when more than 2,000 attempts to penetrate the tunnel were registered, a spokesman, Romain Dufour, said on Friday.

The issue of immigration is politically sensitive in Britain, with Prime Minister David Cameron demanding changes to Britain’s relationship to the European Union and restrictions on benefits for legal migrants before an in-or-out referendum on membership in the bloc due by the end of 2017.

Britain will vote to leave the European Union if it does not secure “robust, substantial and irreversible” reforms, Philip Hammond, the British foreign secretary, warned on Saturday, on the eve of the annual Conservative Party conference.

“If we can’t get the commitments we need from our European partners on things like Britain being outside the commitment to ever-closer union,” he said, “we rule nothing out.”

The Conservatives have a small majority in Parliament, but almost a third of their 330 legislators are thought to want to leave the union. Most polls show a majority of Britons want to stay in the bloc, but those in favor of leaving are gaining ground, in part because of Europe’s chaotic handling of the migrant crisis.