David M. Herszenhorn, Andrew Roth
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/13/world/europe/as-part-of-ukraine-deal-russia-to-free-imprisoned-ukraine-pilot.html
“It turned out that she crossed the Russian border without documents, posing as a refugee,” Mr. Markin said. He added that Ms. Savchenko had been detained during a routine check of documents by the authorities.

The Ukrainian government said, however, that Ms. Savchenko had been captured by rebel forces and transported to Russia.

Nikolai Polozov, one of Ms. Savchenko’s lawyers, said that his client had participated in the protests in Kiev, the Ukrainian capital, last year that ousted the country’s president, Viktor F. Yanukovych, and that she had helped carry medicine to protesters wounded by gunfire.

As war broke out in eastern Ukraine, Ms. Savchenko took leave several times from the army to travel to the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, Mr. Polozov said. On the morning the two Russian journalists were killed, Mr. Polozov said, Ms. Savchenko was wounded in an artillery fight nearby, and she and several others were captured. He said cellphone records proved that she was caught at least 30 minutes before the mortar fire that killed the journalists.

He said Ms. Savchenko had been held for two weeks in a gymnasium in Luhansk before being taken across the border and turned over to the Russian authorities.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Even before the war, Ms. Savchenko was a national hero for being one of Ukraine’s first female combat pilots, and was the subject of a documentary. She had combat experience in Iraq, where she served as a paratrooper with a Ukrainian contingent supporting the American-led war effort, and used that experience to pressure the Ukrainian military into admitting her to the Ivan Kozhedub Air Force University in Kharkiv for pilot training.

She has been similarly steel-willed in prison. She has been on a hunger strike in recent weeks and has repeatedly castigated the Russian government for her detention, at times insisting on speaking only Ukrainian in court.

At one hearing, she used a speaking opportunity to address the television cameras more than the judge. “I’m tired of Russia’s lies, your deceitful judges and your dishonest media,” she said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Since her detention, she has been elected to the Ukrainian Parliament as a member of the Fatherland party, led by former Prime Minister Yulia V. Tymoshenko. Last month, other lawmakers from the party wore T-shirts in Parliament that read, “Free Nadiya Savchenko.”

As a result of the cease-fire agreement in Minsk, it seems that they might get their wish. Mr. Poroshenko said at the news conference that there was a provision for all prisoners of war to be set free.

Aleksei K. Pushkov, a prominent Russian lawmaker, cautioned that Ms. Savchenko’s release was not a foregone conclusion.

“There is no automatic mechanism to free a person accused of being accomplice to murder, in this case of a Russian journalist,” Mr. Pushkov said, Russian news agencies reported.

As of Thursday afternoon, there was no indication of Ms. Savchenko’s release, Mark Feygin, another lawyer for Ms. Savchenko, said by telephone. “As long as Putin or someone trusted by him does not confirm this information, we can only speak about it theoretically,” he said.