James Kanter
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/28/world/europe/european-union-asks-member-countries-to-accept-quotas-of-migrants.html
But by moving forward a proposal that is already unpopular in many countries, the commission has exacerbated tensions over the broader issue of immigration in the European Union. A large number of member states, including Britain, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Latvia, have already pushed back against the idea of mandatory quotas. And a mandatory quota would require a vote by a two-thirds majority of member states under the European Union’s weighted voting system to take effect.

Asylum seekers are often unwelcome in countries where there is little experience of accepting newcomers from Africa and the Middle East, as in the Baltics, or where the population already believes that the country is overcrowded, as in Britain. Some countries have also criticized Italy and Greece for what they see as failing to identify migrants who do not qualify for asylum.

In an effort to make the plan more acceptable, the commission said any migrants who did not meet asylum criteria would not be allowed to stay.

“Everyone who needs sanctuary should find it in Europe,” said Frans Timmermans, the first vice president of the commission. “But those who have no justified claim should be quickly identified and returned to their home country.”

The first quota is an emergency plan to temporarily relocate 40,000 migrants arriving in Italy and Greece to other states during the next two years under a mandatory system. Those migrants, expected to be from Syria and Eritrea, would remain in Europe while they underwent asylum review to determine whether they could stay.

A second quota plan would resettle 20,000 refugees — these could include Syrians from camps in Lebanon and Turkey — over two years across Europe. Candidates for the resettlement program would be identified by the United Nations refugee authorities. Participation in that system is expected to be voluntary for European Union countries.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Under a distribution system based on the capacity of countries to accept migrants, France and Germany would take the most people under both of the quota systems.

Britain and Ireland can choose not to participate in the mandatory quota system under existing agreements with the European Union. But others, including the Czech Republic and other East and Central European countries, would need to mount sufficient opposition to block approval. Denmark is exempt from most European Union asylum rules.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Elizabeth Collett, the director of the Migration Policy Institute Europe, a research institute based in Brussels, said some of the most powerful countries would push hard for the emergency quota ahead of a possible surge in arrivals this summer.

“Countries like Germany and Sweden have enormous moral authority here,” Ms. Collett said, “because they are not only ready to do more themselves to take in asylum seekers, at least temporarily, but they are firmly in favor of the rest of the European Union doing their part, too.”

The quotas are just part of the response that Europeans have considered to deal with a migrant crisis that has been made more acute by the instability in Libya, a frequent beginning point for smugglers. The country has become ungovernable since Western powers backed a revolt that ousted Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi four years ago.

This month, European foreign and defense ministers agreed to use military force to disable or sink smugglers’ vessels to break up their business networks. But European officials still need to answer numerous questions about how naval forces would operate in Libyan waters — including whether those forces would take migrants rescued near African shores back to Libya or to Europe for asylum review.