Alison Smale, Barbara Surk
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/08/world/europe/angela-merkel-calls-for-united-europe-to-address-migrant-crisis.html
Ms. Merkel — who has coined a new motto, ”We can manage,” a kind of German “Yes, we can” — has stuck by what she says is the duty to welcome refugees.

But even officials who share Ms. Merkel’s embrace of the migrants are citing a dearth of housing and personnel to help house, feed, register, heal and educate them.

“German bureaucracy is being tested to its utmost because we have to arrange things really quickly,” Marcel Schweitzer, an official who is part of the effort in the city-state of Hamburg, said this week. “It is really, really difficult to find any space in all of Germany.”

Even tougher, he said, is finding qualified personnel. “The biggest problem right now is finding social workers,” he said. “The market is quite honestly simply swept clean.”

New figures showed that some 164,000 people were registered as arrivals in September alone, compared with a total of 557,000 for the first eight months of 2015, though the federal Interior Ministry warned that the monthly estimate might be inaccurate because it was compiled in haste and under stress.

Austria, which has been working with Germany to help manage the flow across the borders, has said it has room for 30,000 people a year, but is now accommodating some 60,000 and expects a total this year of 85,000.

With tempers fraying, several hundred migrants battled overnight at facilities in Hamburg and Braunschweig; at least three major disturbances were reported at shelters last week. A number of migrant housing complexes have been set on fire, continuing a trend in Germany that started long before the large influx of migrants that began in August.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Austria, the migrant crisis is buoying support for the far right Freedom Party, which showed strongly in Sept. 27 regional elections and is threatening to break almost a century of leftist government in city elections in Vienna on Sunday.

Chancellor Werner Faymann of Austria, a Social Democrat, this week became the first European head of government to tour the Greek island of Lesbos — a first port of European arrival for many of the refugees from Syria. The visit was widely seen as an attempt to help the left in the Vienna elections by showing its leader tackling the migrant problem. But it also highlighted Austria’s strategic position in braking the steady flow of migrants from Greece to Germany.

Berlin is trying to slow the flow and is reaching out to enlist support across and beyond Europe. Ms. Merkel on television was quite plain that Turkey is a key part of her solution, and would receive financial aid to help care for the 2.3 million refugees it already has from Syria and Iraq. Austrian and Croatian officials have made it clear that Germany is pressing them to stem the migrants’ movement northward.

In Germany itself, President Joachim Gauck warned that Germany’s welcome could not be unlimited. “Our heart is big, but our possibilities are finite,” he said on Sept. 27.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

A week later, at the official 25th anniversary event for the reunification of Germany, Mr. Gauck suggested that the migrants would test Germany even more severely than that historic event, which brought together similar people. Now, Mr. Gauck said, Germans must integrate perhaps more than a million outsiders, uniting people who had always lived apart.

The Christian Social Union, the Bavarian sister party of Ms. Merkel’s Christian Democrats, has been even more blunt in warning of the consequences of Ms. Merkel’s decision to throw open the borders in early September. The Bavarian leader Horst Seehofer on Wednesday even talked of mounting a “self-defense.”

Wednesday’s flurry of activity followed a fall in Ms. Merkel’s personal popularity in polls, and a new survey that showed her conservative bloc had fallen two percentage points in popularity, to 39 percent. The small Alternative for Germany, which has embraced a nationalist message, gained two percentage points in a clear sign of popular doubt about the chancellor’s policies.

Ms. Merkel’s decision to put Mr. Altmaier, her chief of staff, in charge of the migrant effort may quiet criticism of other figures, like Interior Minister Thomas de Maizière, widely blamed for failing to anticipate the influx and sometimes at odds with Ms. Merkel over how to handle it.

Officials said the challenge was not likely to let up soon.

“This is the new normal,” said Peter Webinger, a senior official for migration and asylum in Austria’s Interior Ministry. “It’s not enough to acknowledge this as a fact. We need a way to act on it in line with humanitarian principles. We have a diagnosis. Now, we need a remedy.”