Alison Smale
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/world/europe/angela-merkels-encounter-with-a-teary-young-refugee-draws-mixed-reactions.html
Hundreds of thousands of migrants have entered Germany in the last year, hoping to share in its strong economy.

Ms. Merkel’s government has repeatedly emphasized the need to welcome the newcomers and to provide housing and other services, even as a right-wing anti-immigrant movement has grown and taken to the streets in protest.

But in the encounter with the girl, Ms. Merkel pointed out that not every migrant can find shelter in Europe, and that not every applicant for asylum or other legal status can be approved.

“Politics is sometimes hard,” the chancellor says in the video. “Some people will have to go back.”

News reports said that the girl, identified only by her first name, Reem, had been in Germany for four years and narrowly avoided deportation. The chancellor’s office on Thursday declined to reveal her age or last name.

She was among 32 mostly teenage students who were assembled Wednesday in the Baltic port of Rostock for one of the chancellor’s sessions in a listening campaign called Gut Leben in Deutschland, or Living Well in Germany.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The young Palestinian spends several minutes calmly explaining her story to Ms. Merkel in fluent German, mentioning that her father is forbidden to work because the family does not have a permanent residence permit; that she hopes to go to university; and that she would love to feel as secure as her peers in enjoying their teenage lives.

In the video, Ms. Merkel is seen listening sympathetically before explaining to Reem that not everybody can come to Germany and stay here.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

She mentions the possibility that Reem might profit from expedited procedures that Germany is putting in place for asylum seekers. But that policy may well result in more deportations.

When Reem starts to cry, Ms. Merkel approaches her, pats her on the shoulder and praises her for her articulate presentation of her family’s plight.

By Thursday, the video of the encounter had provoked criticism of Ms. Merkel as hardhearted and was trending on Twitter under the hashtag #merkelstreichelt, a reference to the chancellor’s effort to comfort the girl.

But the chancellor also had her defenders, including Ines Pohl, a well-known journalist and the former editor of the leftist daily known as Taz.

Ms. Merkel could have taken the political path and offered some individual examination of the case of Reem’s family, Ms. Pohl wrote. Instead, “the chancellor was honest and certainly not cold.”