Rick Lyman, Steven Erlanger, Aurelien Breeden
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/08/world/europe/europe-migrant-crisis.html
With pressure building on European countries to accept more of the migrants — and many countries, notably Hungary, resisting that pressure — President François Hollande of France announced on Monday that his country would take in 24,000 asylum seekers over two years.

In Britain, Prime Minister David Cameron said his country would accept 20,000 refugees from Syria. In Germany, which has been accepting by far the largest number of arrivals, Chancellor Angela Merkel vowed to set aside $6.7 billion to deal with the crisis.

The numbers those European nations have agreed to accept are much smaller than the numbers of those who have entered the Continent, and who continue to arrive. And many countries, especially in Eastern Europe, are balking at accepting more than a token number.

Mr. Hollande said a plan was expected to be presented on Wednesday by the European Commission, the union’s executive arm, that would redistribute 120,000 people across the 28-nation bloc over the next two years.

Photo

“It is the duty of France, where the right to asylum is entirely part of its soul, of its flesh,” Mr. Hollande said.

The European Union, he said, needed to create “hot spot” reception centers at those borders under the greatest onslaught — in Greece, Italy and Hungary — to register new arrivals and turn back those who do not meet the requirements for asylum.

Mr. Cameron said Monday that Britain would accept up to 20,000 Syrian refugees, but they would most likely be limited to those who apply for asylum from camps in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. The British government is wary of giving migrants any incentive to make the dangerous journey into Europe, officials said, and do not wish to favor more well-to-do refugees who can afford the trip.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Challenged by Harriet Harman, acting leader of the opposition Labour Party, to say how many would be admitted this year, officials declined to give a specific target.

Several other British lawmakers criticized the announcement, with some calling for the number to be increased. “The offer of 20,000 refugees over five years amounts to just 12 refugees a day, which falls pitifully short of what is needed and of what people in this country deserve and expect,” said Caroline Lucas, a lawmaker for the Green Party.

In Germany, Ms. Merkel said that “what we are experiencing now is something that will occupy and change our country in coming years.”

“We want that the change is positive, and we believe we can accomplish that,” she added.

Hungary, which has taken a much harder line than most European nations, continued to reject demands that all countries accept quotas.

Prime Minister Viktor Orban has repeatedly said that Hungary has the right to protect its Christian traditions by refusing to accept large numbers of Muslims, and that many of the arrivals making their way to Germany and other prosperous nations do not deserve asylum.

“We have to face the reality that these people do not simply want refugee status,” he told a gathering of diplomats on Monday. “They are really after the German way of life.”

Yet strains were beginning to show in the Hungarian government. On Monday, Csaba Hende, Hungary’s defense minister, submitted his resignation after a national security meeting, and Mr. Orban accepted it, the state news agency reported.

Mr. Hende had been responsible, along with the minister of the interior, for construction of the border fence. Mr. Orban had asked that it be completed by the end of August, but only a first stage, a line of razor wire along the ground, had been completed by then, with the bulk of the 13-foot barrier still being built. Those arriving Monday in Roszke could listen, as they walked along the rail tracks through the gap in the fence, to the clang of a pile driver sinking metal poles into the loamy ground just a few hundred yards away.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

This year alone, more than 150,000 migrants have requested asylum in Hungary. The latest figures from the government show that the largest number, 53,467, came from Syria, with 41,094 from Afghanistan, 24,554 from Kosovo and the rest from Iraq, Pakistan, Eritrea and other troubled nations.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The opening of a new relocation camp in Roszke on Sunday — not far from the muddy field where the latest arrivals were being held — is only the first step in a coming crackdown on illegal migration, Mr. Orban promised.

A series of revisions to Hungary’s refugee laws, set to take effect Sept. 15, will give the authorities greater powers to contain the flow and punish those who contribute to it.

One package of revisions, passed by the Hungarian Parliament on Friday, allows for the building of closed camps along the border to rule quickly on whether new arrivals qualify for refugee status — a plan that seemed similar to Mr. Hollande’s call for “hot spot” centers.

More revisions, expected to be passed this week, would give the police much greater authority, including the right to enter private homes if they suspect migrants are hiding there, and would authorize the Hungarian military to help protect the border.

“It is Hungary’s primary interest to protect its border,” Mr. Orban said Monday. “For this, we need a physical point, a physical line, a construction, which can be guarded by the army, the police and any other official sent to the border.”

Hungary was not the only scene of tension on Monday. In Spain, a day after the police clashed with migrants at a detention center in the eastern city of Valencia, the regional government called on the authorities to investigate the episode, including reports that the police had fired rubber bullets to regain control.

In Denmark, the police stopped a Copenhagen-bound train carrying about 100 migrants. Passengers with valid passports and visas were shifted to another train while the migrants were held.

The move was in reaction to an influx of migrants that came from Hungary over the weekend, a police official said. The first few dozen agreed to board buses to reception centers where they were to be fed and given beds and access to showers while they went through registration.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“During registration, you will be interviewed and you will be asked your desires — if you want to seek asylum or not,” an officer told them.

The group — which was on its way to Norway and Sweden — included Syrians, Afghans, Iraqis and Iranians who had made their way over the weekend from Budapest’s Keleti train station.

“I don’t want to stay here,” said Nasser Taha, 21, from Tripoli, Libya. “I have no language, no work, no people.”

At the camp near Roszke, migrants waited Monday for bus rides to the nearby processing center where they would be registered and then sent north. Angry groups, weary of the delays, marched on the line of police officers blocking their exit, chanting “Freedom! Freedom!” They were repeatedly pushed back.

Taha Shaben, 28, who said he fled Syria when his family’s textile factory was bombed, scowled at those trying to muscle their way through.

“I am Syrian, you know,” he said. “A real Syrian. Here, we have Pakistanis, Afghans, Iraqis, and they all throw away their papers and claim to be Syrian.”

Being from Syria is the surest path to refugee status. “Oh yes,” he said. “Everyone is a Syrian now. It is a big problem.”

Five hundred yards down the railroad tracks, at the gap in the fence, a few dozen new arrivals rested before continuing on to the distant line of police officers and television crews.

“We are lost; we have no cellphones,” said Pierre Alshoufi, 18, who said he was a Christian from Hama, Syria. “They fell into the Greek sea. Please, what is up ahead? Can anyone tell us what will become of us?”