Rick Lyman, Helene Bienvenu
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/17/world/europe/europe-refugee-migrant-crisis.html
One young man held up an orange sign reading “Right to Travel.” Others read, “Europe, your humanity is lost” and “Hungaria Please Help Us.”

The crowd had been told that, as of Tuesday, when new refugee laws went into effect in Hungary, migrants would not be allowed across the border if they had not been fingerprinted and approved, and that crossing the border illegally became a major offense punishable with years in prison.

But having gotten this far from Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq and other desperate countries, they grasped at hopes that the Hungarians would relent — just as they did when a huge migrant encampment sprouted outside the main train station in Budapest this month.

Aid workers moved through the crowd, trying to persuade the migrants to pull back and give Croatia a try, and many said that they were about to give up and follow that advice.

Photo

Still, the crowd grew increasingly impatient, and 200 or so people pushed up against the first gate, removing its razor wire and breaking it open at 3 p.m. A second, lower fence remained closed, a few yards farther into the border zone.

A squad of about 100 riot police officers moved into the area just behind that second fence and an armored vehicle, topped with water cannons, came next.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Open! Open!” the crowd chanted. Excited young men clambered on top of that first gate, which had been broken open, and began bouncing up and down on it, trying to knock it off its hinges.

All of a sudden, an invisible, noxious gas began to pour into the crowd from the Hungarian side. In a panic, the people nearest the gate began to scramble backward, pushing people aside as they flailed, tears streaming from their eyes. Children grabbed for their parents. Some tossed oranges and apples they had been carrying back at the riot police, ineffectually. People ran into one another, tripped, fell.

People grabbed for bottles of water offered by volunteers along the roadside, slapping it onto their faces and trying to wash the gas out of their eyes and hair.

My Days With the Migrants Here's a firsthand account from the migrant trail, with a look at the daily hardships and the moments of sporadic joy that occur along the way. Posted by New York Times Video on Tuesday, September 15, 2015

The crowd collapsed into chaos and ran back into Serbia. Then, the crowd re-formed and slowly moved forward again. And again, there was a gas attack.

Grabbing piles of wood and bits of trash, a few dozen migrants responded by building small fires in the road and surrounding fields, the acrid smell of burning plastic bags filling the air.

The armored vehicle fired its water cannons toward the crowd and the fires, putting some of them out and turning the area into a swamp.

Meanwhile, other migrants went behind a battered building marked Duty Free Shop and began breaking crumbling concrete and hurling pieces toward the Hungarian police, who were lined up just out of range.

“It has been pressure, pressure, for more than a day now,” said Rafy, 36, a high school geography teacher from Swiada, Syria, who watched the rock throwing from a safe distance. “It is like a balloon filling up. Eventually it must burst.” He declined to give his last name, fearing that the family he left behind would be persecuted by Syrian officials.

Photo

The stone-throwing subsided when word spread that the Hungarians had opened the second gate. The armored vehicle had moved about 50 yards farther into the border zone.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It is open! It is open!” people shouted, and about 200 or 300 people formed cautiously on the Serbian side and began to walk slowly through the gate and toward the armored vehicle. “Thank you, Serbia!” one migrant shouted as he pushed forward, clutching his sad sack of belongings.

As soon as the crowd drew nearer to the armored vehicles, dozens of riot police officers appeared, shields aloft. The crowd paused, waited, and then the police surged forward, batons swinging. With a crack, crack, crack, tear gas canisters arced through the air and fell all around the suddenly frantic crowd.

The gas swirled through the scampering crowd and, again, people begged for water and tried to thread a path through the chaos to fresh air.

“We heard the crowd had opened the gate, so we came to see,” said Mohamed Abdoulhanin, 25, a food safety supervisor from Damascus. “We expected them to let us in and they attacked us. Why?”

Although he had been hoping Hungary would relent, after more than a day at the closed gate, Mr. Abdoulhanin said he had given up.

“This is the worst thing that has happened to me on the whole journey,” he said. “I want to live in Austria. It is so close. Just one country away! I guess I will try Croatia.”

By twilight, the crowd had calmed again and the riot police remained in place at the border. People began preparing dinner in their windblown tents, but a growing stream of people walked along the road back into Serbia saying they would give Croatia a chance.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The government said that 14 police officers had been injured, but the only injured people in evidence were people who had been trampled, hit with batons or flattened by the gas. Several people gasped for air on the ground next to ambulances.

“This is not a peaceful crowd that wants to travel through peacefully,” said Zoltan Kovacs, the Hungarian government’s chief international spokesman.

Photo

Hungarian officials put part of the blame on the Serbian police, who were barely a presence during the afternoon and did nothing to subdue or control the crowd.

“We can’t see the functioning of the Serbian police, even though this is on Serbian territory,” said Gyorgy Bakondi, an aide to Prime Minister Viktor Orban. “We are going to take all legal steps to ensure Hungary’s security. Armed, aggressive, attacking people cannot enter.”

Aleksandar Vulin, the Serbian minister for labor, employment and social policy, responded by expressing “the harshest possible protest” to the Hungarian police firing their water cannons into Serbian territory.

“The water cannon reached the Serbian side,” he said. “A state does not have the right to do that.”

International emergency relief officials said they feared the clash may portend more violence as the patience of the migrants runs out and many refuse to move.

“These people already have covered thousands of kilometers to get to that point,” said Balazs Lehel, program coordinator in the Budapest office of the International Organization for Migration. “They’re so tired and frustrated that they don’t have the strength to get up again and find another route.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But many were already doing so.

Nearly 600 migrants crossed the border from Serbia into the small Croatian town of Tovarnik by Wednesday evening, navigating through a processing center before boarding buses heading toward a reception center in the capital, Zagreb.

Croatia’s prime minister promised the asylum seekers safe movement, as long as they were only passing through the country. But humanitarian groups raised concerns that migrants could inadvertently cross through areas near the Hungarian-Croatian border that are littered with thousands of land mines left from the Balkan wars of the 1990s. On Wednesday, Croatian demining experts were sent to the area where many migrants were arriving, Reuters reported.

Hungary had moved swiftly to show that it would enforce its new laws. On Wednesday, the government announced that police officers had detained 519 people for illegal entry or damaging a border fence since the new rules came into force a day earlier. The authorities have opened 46 criminal cases, and the first suspects were to appear in court Wednesday afternoon, according to Mr. Bakondi, the prime minister’s aide.

Court officials in Szeged, Hungary, said that nine adults — seven from Iraq, two from Syria — would be deported for illegally crossing, after expedited court proceedings.

The ripple effects of Hungary’s crackdown reached as far as Istanbul, where hundreds of migrants were huddled in informal camps after they were prevented from leaving Turkey or picked up on highways and brought back to the city. Still, some had made it to Edirne, on the European side of Turkey, where migrants thronged a bus station in the hope of getting clearance to walk to the border with Greece, and some threatened a hunger strike until they were let through.

“We’ll go to Greece, then Serbia, but skip Hungary and go through Slovenia, instead,” said one Syrian migrant, Ghassen Tekriti, who arrived in Edirne on Tuesday.

At the Macedonian border and in towns like Kanjiza, Serbia, where migrants had pooled in recent months before making the trek across the Hungarian border, buses appeared Wednesday, offering to take people directly to the Croatian border.

“Our friends told us not to go to Hungary, because they would put you in prison for three years if you tried to cross the border,” said Daban Sabir, 25, a student from Suleymani, Iraq, who was one of the first migrants to test the new route into the European Union through Croatia and Slovenia.

Clutching a document from the Serbian authorities that he had been told was essential to enter Croatia, Mr. Sabir and the others moved down the road toward a line of Croatian police vans sitting between radish and corn fields.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I believe this is a trend which will increase in coming days,” said Terence Pike, who works with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Croatia.