Neil Macfarquhar
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/12/world/europe/meeting-of-world-leaders-in-belarus-aims-to-address-ukraine-conflict.html
Observers were left to scan pictures of the meeting to look for omens. A series published by RT — the Kremlin-backed satellite television network — which showed Mr. Putin apparently snapping a green plastic pen in half was taken as testament of the intensity of the proceedings.

The Russian ambassador to Belarus, Aleksandr Surikov, said that negotiators for the rebels and the two governments were meeting separately to agree on the logistics of the truce, and the summit meeting leaders would then discuss how to implement it, according to the RIA Novosti news agency. There were also unconfirmed reports that the talks would end with only a joint declaration, a traditional diplomatic formula to try to paper over failure.

The talks are based on a 12-point peace deal called the Minsk Protocol, signed here in September but violated almost immediately. The goals of any deal have long been apparent, including a cease-fire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons to create a demilitarized zone and a degree of autonomy for the rebel-controlled regions. But the details, such as where to draw the demilitarized zone, the degree of autonomy and Ukraine’s control of its border with Russia, remained contentious.

Before leaving for Minsk, Mr. Poroshenko told his cabinet that both peace and continued war were possible. He warned that if the session failed and fighting in the east continued to escalate, he might impose martial law nationwide, which could jeopardize a $40 billion aid package being negotiated with Western lenders.

Photo

The Ukrainian leader repeated a few of Kiev’s central demands, which underscored the gulf between its position and that of Moscow. Ukraine endorsed decentralization but not federalization, he said, noting that the separatist regions could be granted rights similar to those in autonomous communities in Russia.

In Moscow, before he flew to Minsk, Mr. Lavrov took exception to certain Ukrainian positions, suggesting that a truce, the withdrawal of heavy weaponry and the beginning of a political process, as well as the restoration of economic ties between Kiev and the separatist regions, were far more important than control over the border.

Ms. Merkel has emphasized repeatedly that she regards the chances of success in the talks as slim, even after she and Mr. Hollande met with Mr. Putin in Moscow and with Mr. Poroshenko in Kiev on Friday. But she said the effort would continue given the daily rise in the civilian death toll from the conflict, which the United Nations has estimated at more than 5,400 since last spring.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In Germany, Norbert Röttgen, the chairman of the foreign affairs committee in Germany’s Parliament, said the talks would either come to naught or produce a retread of the original Minsk cease-fire agreement in September that might only cement the fact that the first version failed.

”I think there will either be nothing, because Putin unfortunately tactically has the upper hand in the short term,” he said, adding that Mr. Poroshenko had limited room to maneuver

“Or there will be a new cease-fire, a second Minsk, which would include a significant shift of the demarcation line to the West,” Mr. Röttgen said. “The violation of Minsk one would then be honored in Minsk two, and whether Putin would then keep to Minsk two, there are considerable doubts.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The lack of trust between the two sides is a major stumbling block to reach any accord, not to mention the continuing violence.

In Donetsk, shells fell shortly after 7 a.m. not far from the city center. Residents who were reached by telephone said the shells first hit near the Donetsk Metallurgical Plant and then, a few minutes later, smashed through the roof of a bus depot a few blocks away. Rebel leaders said six people died in the blasts.

Although the European leaders and Mr. Putin had said they would not come to Minsk unless the prospects of reaching a deal were strong, the sides still needed to bridge considerable differences. Ukraine wants the complete disarmament of the separatists and the withdrawal of Russian troops and armaments — which both the Kremlin and the rebels continue to deny were ever sent. It is unlikely, however, that the separatists could have held out this long, much less gone on the offensive, without significant Russian support in men, money and matériel.

Video

Ukraine has promised some degree of self-rule to the breakaway areas, but it wants to control the lengthy border with Russia. It also seeks a full exchange of prisoners.

The rebel areas are pressing to exist separately from the rest of Ukraine and to keep their weapons, and they are demanding amnesty for their leaders. They also want Ukraine to resume pension payments and other forms of financial support, while pushing for a buffer zone wide enough that the main cities cannot be shelled by Ukrainian forces.

One possible point of contention in the talks is where the cease-fire line will fall, given that the rebels have captured more than 200 square miles of territory since the September agreement. Ukraine has insisted on re-establishing that line.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Putin has tried to distance Russia from the conflict, while also laying down settlement demands. Moscow has emphasized that Ukraine should create a federal system that would allow separatist areas to have their own foreign and economic policies, and would protect the Russian language and culture, while Kiev pays the bills. Russia also plans to keep Crimea, which it annexed in March, and has called on the Ukrainian Army to withdraw from the southeast.

Europe seeks to keep Ukraine whole, to preserve the principle that no borders can be altered by force. After Ms. Merkel, speaking last week, recalled her childhood in East Germany, some analysts suggested that she envisioned a solution for Ukraine that included a European-oriented west Ukraine and a Russian-influenced east, with some manner of peaceful separation between them.

The United States has threatened to arm Ukraine, although President Obama said Monday that Washington would not decide on the matter until the outcome of the summit meeting in Minsk was clear.

The outcome in Minsk depends largely on what Russia is willing to offer and what the Ukrainian president can sell to a public not eager for compromise. The two sides are reeling economically, with Kiev nearly bankrupt and Moscow trying to survive the collapse in oil prices and attendant budget problems, compounded by Western economic sanctions.

Many analysts expect Moscow wants to create a frozen conflict in Ukraine like ones in the Transnistria region in Moldova and in Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia. Those enclaves were wrenched from their countries but not incorporated into Russia, and could be used to stir unrest at any time.

Moscow would then have the means to prevent Ukraine from joining NATO, and preferably the European Union as well. But since the revolution fomented by Ukrainians last February was partly inspired by the demand to draw closer to Europe, and hundreds of soldiers have died defending that goal, it is not clear that Mr. Poroshenko can sell it.

“The question is not what the Russians want, but what the Ukrainians can accept,” said Dmitri V. Trenin, the director of the Carnegie Moscow Center. “The strategy is to keep Crimea Russian and to keep eastern Ukraine as a center of resistance to the nationalist, anti-Russian tendencies which now prevail in Kiev,” he said. “The game is a long one. It will not end this month, nor this year.”