Aurelien Breeden
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/09/world/europe/paris-attacks-fingerprint-brussels.html
Marouane Bouarfa, who lives a few doors from the building where the fingerprint was found, said news of a terrorist safe house on the block came as a shock.

“A complete surprise,” Mr. Bouarfa said. “I’ve lived here for 17 years and I have never had a problem.” He said neighbors did not recall seeing anything unusual. “No one knew anything,” he said.

Mr. Abdeslam is suspected of having driven three suicide bombers to the national soccer stadium in St.-Denis, north of Paris, one of three locations that was hit by a coordinated set of bombings and shootings that killed 130 people and wounded over 350 others on the night of Nov. 13. According to the authorities, he was then able to leave Paris, thanks to accomplices who drove him back to Belgium, where the police lost track of him.

Photo

Ali Oulkadi, one of the men in detention in Belgium, is suspected of having driven Mr. Abdeslam to Schaerbeek after Mr. Abdeslam’s return to Brussels. The prosecutor’s office declined to say whether Mr. Oulkadi had rented the apartment, and it said it was unclear whether the fingerprint belonging to Mr. Abdeslam dated from before or after the attacks.

The Paris prosecutor, François Molins, said in an interview on the radio station France Inter on Friday morning that it was “obvious” that the attacks had been coordinated from abroad, by people in Syria but also by individuals “who pushed fanaticism and professionalism” to the point of coming to monitor the terrorist operations from France and Belgium, he said, mentioning Abdelhamid Abaaoud.

Mr. Abaaoud, who died in a police raid on a hide-out in St.-Denis on Nov. 18, is believed to have helped organize the logistics of the attacks.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Referring to a separate incident, Mr. Molins said in the interview that investigators were unsure about the identity of a man who was shot and killed by officers as he tried to attack a police station in Paris on Thursday.

Mr. Molins said that the man may have given a false identity in 2013 when he was stopped for theft by the police in the south of France, when he claimed to be Moroccan and to have been born in 1995.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Police officers found a piece of paper on the man’s body with the Muslim profession of faith, a drawing of the flag of the Islamic State and a pledge of allegiance to the extremist group’s leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. The paper also referred to the situation in Syria as justification for the man’s attack.

But the note identified the man as Tunisian, not Moroccan, and used a different name than the one given in 2013, Mr. Molins said. A cellphone with a German SIM card was being analyzed by investigators, he added.

Mr. Molins, who has been at the forefront of multiple terrorist investigations in France and who rarely speaks directly to the news media, said that 2015 had been an “extremely difficult” year but warned that 2016 would be no different. He said that the authorities were confronted with a “protean” terrorist threat involving not only highly organized and coordinated attacks but also isolated acts by individuals receptive to Islamic State propaganda.

“There is absolutely no reason to be optimistic, because we have a growing threat and a shape-shifting threat, which leads me to say that today ‘risk zero’ does not exist and might never exist,” Mr. Molins told France Inter. “It might be hard to hear, but it has to be known.”