Steven Erlanger
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/26/world/europe/uk-dup-deal-conservatives.html
Mrs. May called a snap election for June 8 to bolster her authority in Parliament in preparation for Britain’s exit, but her campaign faltered and she lost her absolute majority. With the support of the D.U.P., she will now have an effective working majority in the 650-seat House of Commons of 13 — given that Sinn Fein does not take up the seven seats it won and the speaker of the House and his two deputies do not vote.

The terms of the agreement are still vague beyond the extra funding for the province over the five-year term of the Parliament, if it lasts that long.

Such deals with smaller parties, which are short of a formal coalition, have proved fragile in the past. And Mrs. May’s own position is extremely weak, both in her party, which was shocked by her failure, and in the country.

There is continuing speculation that the Conservatives may choose to replace her as prime minister as early as October; no senior Conservative has publicly suggested that the party wants to fight another election with her as leader.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Some Conservatives, like John Major, the former prime minister, had urged Mrs. May to manage a minority government without the D.U.P. Their fear was that a formal deal would violate the British government’s vow of neutrality in Northern Ireland, where the D.U.P. and Sinn Fein are at odds over continuing a power-sharing agreement.

Opposition parties said the pact was “shoddy” (the Liberal Democrats) and “grubby” (both Labour and the Scottish National Party) and called for its details to be publicized. Labour’s deputy leader, John McDonnell, said: “Let’s call this grubby deal what it is: This is a straightforward political bribe to desperately prop up Theresa May in office.”

Mrs. May also gave more details on Monday of Britain’s offer to secure the rights of more than three million citizens of other European Union countries after Britain’s withdrawal, as she seeks to gain reciprocal rights for some one million British citizens living in the bloc.

“We want you to stay,” she said in Parliament. “I want to completely reassure people” that “no E.U. citizen currently in the U.K. lawfully will be asked to leave.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But she did not specify a cutoff date, saying it should be part of the negotiations with Brussels, which wants the cutoff to be when Britain formally leaves, March 29, 2019, and not before.

The two sides also disagree on what body should adjudicate disputes over citizen rights. Britain argues that after it leaves the bloc, British courts should rule for those living in Britain; the European Union wants the European Court of Justice to decide. A compromise may be found in a special tribunal.

There are also many complicated issues, like the rights of spouses of European Union citizens living in Britain who arrive after the cutoff date, and who will be eligible for health care coverage after Britain’s withdrawal is formalized.

And these are only some of the easier issues involved in Britain and Europe unwinding a legal relationship of more than 40 years.