Alison Smale
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/19/world/europe/far-right-merkel-refugee-policies-germany-home-state.html
Polls predict a tight race. Ms. Merkel’s conservative bloc and its center-left partners in the federal government hover just four or five points ahead of the unprecedented 19 percent support for the far-right in the state, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, in the former Communist East.

This made the decision to move the foreign minors all the tougher for Steffen Bockhahn, the Left Party senator in Rostock who was responsible for making it. “You can’t do anything else. If something happened … ” His voice trailed off. “These young people have come to seek shelter. And if they are beaten up by Nazis, then we have failed.”

Annette Kob, 49, whose group Newcomers Without Barriers, started the experiment in the Rostock suburb of Gross Klein, was equally dismayed. “I don’t know what else one could have done in this situation,” she said in an interview. “To leave them there with a constant police guard was also not sustainable.”

The right-wing website Patrioten Rostock, meanwhile, hailed a “victory of the residents” but cautioned: “Now they are just meeting in another corner.”

“People, stay watchful where you live and stand up decisively against this state of affairs,” it urged.

As the commentator Annett Meiritz concluded in Der Spiegel, relocating the refugees “was the right move, but with fatal effect.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The drama of Rostock, she wrote, illustrates how right-wing extremism has taken root over the decades and how problem areas in both east and west Germany have sunk into isolation and helplessness, while establishment politicians underestimate the threat.

Even before the recent events, Rostock, a city of some 200,000, had a difficult reputation — an 11-story refugee shelter within sight of Gross Klein was notoriously set ablaze as young men yelled “Germany for the Germans!” in August 1992. A generation has grown up since then, with no further such episodes in 24 years.

But the problems here have only been amplified by the fact that Ms. Merkel has her parliamentary constituency just down the coast, in Stralsund, and that President Joachim Gauck, once an anti-Communist pastor here and a voice of moral authority in Germany, still visits regularly.

Everyone interviewed emphasized that Gross Klein is not, as Ms. Kob put it, “an especially Nazi place.” Mr. Bockhahn noted that “nothing happened” in the city as the refugee intake swelled last year. Hundreds of Rostock volunteers united last fall to help and temporarily shelter 36,000 refugees who passed through the city to board ferries to Sweden, after Denmark closed its borders to new arrivals.

In Gross Klein, Lukas Hecht, 18, belligerently asserted that Muslim newcomers pursue German women and said he would not stand for it. His friend Tobias Rosner, 26, took a less aggressive stance. “I have friends on both sides,” he said.

Mr. Rosner’s conclusion is that, for the first time, he would vote in the state elections. “I am not having my voice taken away,” he said.

Across Germany, as elsewhere in Europe and the United States, many people feel they have lost out in globalization and are competing for jobs or state resources. Mr. Hecht and Mr. Rosner both suggested the refugees were getting an unfair share of government benefits.

Down the coast in Stralsund, Heike Carstensen, an election candidate for the center-left Social Democrats, observed that people in that town — a beautifully renovated Hanseatic port that was declared a World Heritage Site by Unesco in 2002 — are most worried about education and what their grandchildren will have.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Today’s Headlines: European Morning Get news and analysis from Europe and around the world delivered to your inbox every day in the European morning. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Even if they themselves are working and living better than under Communism, she said, they feel insecure, and are ready to punish the mainstream political parties. Voters “only want to deal us a blow,” Ms. Carstensen said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Using the German acronym for the far-right party, she added: “They expect nothing from the A.F.D. They only want us to feel bad. And that we can’t reach them, and the others do, does make me feel bad.”

At an election meeting in Neustrelitz, in the south of the state, Ms. Merkel invited questions on any topic. Curiously — after a virtuous hour debating local highways and state-funded theater — someone finally asked about the subject that seemed to be on everyone’s mind: refugees and whether Islam belongs in Germany or not.

The chancellor replied by noting that more than 3 million predominantly Muslim Turks live in Germany, and that any religion that keeps to Germany’s Constitution is of course accepted. Islamic terrorism, she pointed out, was present even before the refugees arrived in such numbers.

Security was the biggest theme at a two-hour debate hosted by a local Rostock newspaper, the Ostsee Zeitung, featuring the leaders of all parties.

Leif-Erik Holm, a former radio journalist with a soothing manner and voice, is the top candidate for the Alternative for Germany. “We must close the borders,” he said to applause from the crowd of hundreds. If new asylum applicants arrived despite closed Balkan borders, “they must be sent back.”

Equally clear, in his view, is that the chancellor is to blame.

“We are attacking the Merkel policy,” Mr. Holm said. “Our party is not directed against those who have come. They want a better future. But not everyone can come. And that is what we represent.”