Adam Nossiter
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/13/world/europe/marine-le-pen-national-front-party.html
Other video showed Mr. Chatillon speaking warmly of his own visit with Mr. Degrelle, who was a patron saint of Europe’s far-right youths until his death in 1994.

Some in the National Front flatly deny Mr. Chatillon and Mr. Loustau are either anti-Semitic or nostalgic for the Third Reich, while others make no secret of avoiding them, precisely because of their taint.

But their lingering presence in Ms. Le Pen’s inner circle has called into question the sincerity of her strategy to “un-demonize” her party and renounce its heritage of deep-rooted anti-Semitism since she took over from her father, Jean-Marie, in 2011.

“By the evidence,” said the historian Nicolas Lebourg, a leading National Front specialist at the University of Montpellier, “she considers it’s not something very important.”

The two trusted men continue to work closely with the party’s top leadership, including Ms. Le Pen. They have been charged by French prosecutors in an elaborate campaign-finance scheme that has been crucial to keeping the National Front afloat for years.

The financial scandals have not dented Ms. Le Pen in the polls before the first round of voting on April 23. Potentially more damaging may be the recent revelations about the people she has surrounded herself with, in particular Mr. Chatillon and Mr. Loustau.

“They have remained National Socialist,” said Aymeric Chauprade, once Ms. Le Pen’s principal adviser on foreign affairs until a falling out, partly over his pro-Israel stance.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“They are anti-Semites, nostalgic for the Third Reich, violently anticapitalist, with a hatred for democracy,” he added in an interview. “People think they’re marginal. But in fact, I discovered, she protects them. She supports them. They are at the heart of everything.”

Mr. Chauprade recalled a dinner with Mr. Chatillon and others in the spring of 2014 that was “full of anti-Semitic jokes.” But he added: “They are not joking. They are real Nazis.”

In court documents and in interviews, the two men are depicted as unreformed Nazi sympathizers. And a new book, “Marine Knows Everything,” by two investigative journalists, Marine Turchi and Mathias Destal, includes a photo of Mr. Chatillon, fist raised, at a 1994 rally for a far-right student movement called G.U.D., or Groupe Union Défense.

Photo

Separately, an affidavit filed in a 2014 defamation lawsuit (later dropped) offers a fuller portrait of Mr. Chatillon’s extremist views from that era.

In the affidavit, Denis Le Moal, once a member of G.U.D., described Mr. Chatillon’s nostalgia for the Third Reich and his closeness to Holocaust deniers.

Mr. Le Moal told of a 1993 rally Mr. Chatillon organized for the student group in Paris that resounded with “Sieg Heils” and Nazi salutes.

“During that period, every year, Frédéric Chatillon organized a dinner on the birthday of the ‘fuhrer,’ April 20, to pay homage to ‘this great man,’” the affidavit states.

It goes on to describe a gathering in a Paris restaurant when Mr. Chatillon brought a painted portrait of Hitler — “a portrait Chatillon showed us during the dinner, saying, ‘My beloved fuhrer, he is magnificent,’ and kissing the picture.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It says he also organized “striped-pajama” parties as a student, an allusion to the clothing Jews wore in death camps and concentration camps.

“The only debatable point, in the use of the term ‘neo-Nazi,’ is the wrongful qualifier ‘neo,’” the affidavit states.

Requests to arrange interviews with Mr. Chatillon and Mr. Loustau through associates of theirs were unsuccessful. The men have made no secret of their disdain for journalists.

“To hell with Hitler and the Third Reich!” Mr. Chatillon wrote in a recent Facebook posting. “But to hell also with these ‘journalists’ who write whatever the hell they want.”

On Twitter, Mr. Loustau denounced “these activists hiding behind a press card, benefiting from all the means of state television to try to destroy us.”

The National Front’s treasurer, Wallerand de Saint-Just, defended the men. “In no sense are they nostalgic for the Third Reich,” he said.

“They were turbulent boys, but they have become true professionals,” Mr. Saint-Just said. “They work closely with us and we have confidence in them, in the conception, printing and delivery of campaign materials.”