Stephen Castle
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/05/15/world/europe/theresa-may-borrowing-from-labour-vows-to-extend-protections-for-workers.html
Mrs. May’s emerging credo seems to combine interventionist instincts on some economic and social issues with a hard-line stance on cutting immigration and withdrawing from the European Union, known as Brexit.

“We are seeing a willingness to think of intervention that would have been seen as anathema by hard-core Thatcherites,” said Tim Bale, professor of politics at Queen Mary University of London. He was referring to supporters of Margaret Thatcher, the former Conservative prime minister, whose free market philosophy inspired privatization and deregulation in the 1980s.

But Mrs. May “has not overnight become a continental Christian Democrat,” Mr. Bale added, noting that “hers is maybe more the view that, economically, things have got a little out of kilter and that the vote for Brexit was a reflection of that.”

Stagnating wages among low earners and resentment at rising immigration were thought to be the principal driving force behind last year’s vote to leave the European Union. Mrs. May seems now to be addressing those pro-Brexit voters, many of whom once supported the Labour Party, while also trying to occupy some of the ground in the political center vacated by Labour’s shift to the left.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, has accused her of taking working people “for fools,” while Mrs. May’s critics noted that the Conservatives have resisted European Union legislation protecting workers’ rights, arguing that such employment laws stifle the economy.

On Monday, however, Mrs. May promised to keep workplace rights that are currently guaranteed by European Union law.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Britons are due to vote on June 8 and Mrs. May’s main election strategy is to argue that she is better placed than her less popular Labour rival, Mr. Corbyn, to provide the “strong and stable leadership” which has become her mantra. Mrs. May last month unexpectedly called for the early election, seeking a mandate from voters as difficult negotiations over Brexit are about to begin.

Even when the Conservative Party publishes its election manifesto, which is expected later in the week, a comprehensive political philosophy — or embryonic “Mayism” — might not emerge.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mrs. May remains ideologically enigmatic because she served for six years as Home Secretary, dealing with police, immigration and other internal security issues and making few policy pronouncements outside that area.

Analysts ascribe the intellectual basis of Mrs. May’s brand of conservatism to Nick Timothy, one of her two closest aides. Mr. Timothy was raised in Birmingham, one of Britain’s industrial heartlands, and is a admirer of the type of municipal politics practiced by Joseph Chamberlain, who transformed the leadership of the city in the 19th century and whose legacy has also been cited as an inspiration by Mrs. May.

“It is difficult to know where Nick Timothy ends and Theresa May begins, because Theresa May has never given anything much away,” Mr. Bale said, “so people make the assumption there is someone else behind it.”

Unlike his boss, Mr. Timothy has made much of his thinking public in articles for the ConservativeHome website. In one article published last year, he appealed to his party to “adopt a relentless focus on governing in the interests of ordinary, working people.”

Mrs. May, a clergyman’s daughter, has also stressed her desire to help the so-called JAMS — those “just about managing” to get by — and presented herself as being more in tune with the values of provincial England than with those of its globalized capital city, London.

However, Mr. Bale believes that Mrs. May’s political outreach extends only so far. “She is still, in essence, a Conservative,” he said, “and I don’t think this is as huge a departure as the Tory spinners would like us to think.”

The latest proposals on workers’ rights, he added, “are an attractive garnish on what is still a fairly conventional pitch by the Conservatives about being more competent to run the economy and keeping taxes low.”