Gardiner Harris
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/world/europe/barack-obama-greece-donald-trump.html
Mr. Obama has largely spoken positively about the coming presidency of Donald J. Trump, saying in a Monday news conference that the president-elect had reassured him that he would remain committed to NATO and that he would keep portions of Mr. Obama’s health care law.

On Tuesday, Mr. Obama seemed to change tack, warning against what he said were dangerous divisions of race, religion and ethnicity.

“We are going to have to guard against a rise in a crude sort of nationalism or ethnic identity or tribalism that is built around an ‘us’ and a ‘them,’” he said.

On Wednesday, he said that “even if progress follows a winding path — sometimes forward, sometimes back — democracy is still the most effective form of government ever devised by man.”

Mr. Obama did acknowledge that democracy could be challenging.

“And in multiethnic, multiracial, multicultural societies, like the United States, it can be especially complicated,” he said. “Believe me, I know.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

But he said that globalization and automation, which have created the most prosperous and advanced society in history, were also creating extraordinary anxiety.

“Technology and automation mean that goods can be produced with fewer workers,” the president said. “It means jobs and manufacturing can move across borders where wages are lower and rights are less protected.”

Those trends have also created a global elite that seems to live by a different set of rules, such as being able to avoid taxes, Mr. Obama said. That kind of inequality breeds resentment, he said, and is among the greatest challenges to modern democracies and to the economic formula that has yielded such benefits.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It fuels a feeling that globalization only benefits those at the top,” the president said, adding: “And if people feel that they are losing control of their future, they will push back. We’ve seen it here in Greece and across Europe. We saw it in the vote in Britain to leave the E.U. And now, we’ve seen it in the United States.”

Mr. Obama said that remaining a connected world is still crucial but that the “current path of globalization demands a course correction” to ensure that the fruits of those trends will be more broadly shared.

Standing in the Stavros Niarchos Foundation Cultural Center, which was bedecked with Greek, American and European Union flags, Mr. Obama made a fervent pitch for the European Union, which some Greeks have advocated leaving in recent years because of the costs of remaining tied to the euro.

“European integration — the European Union — remains one of the great political and economic achievements of human history,” Mr. Obama said. “Today, more than ever, the world needs a Europe that is strong, prosperous and democratic.” And he praised Greece for its efforts to shelter thousands of Syrian refugees.

“Like the woman here in Greece who said of the refugees arriving on these shores: ‘We live under the same sun. We fall in love under the same moon. We are all human. We have to help these people,’” Mr. Obama said to sustained applause. “Women like that give me hope.”