Alissa J. Rubin, Aurelien Breeden
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/18/world/europe/france-announces-stronger-fight-against-racism-and-anti-semitism.html
“There is this discrepancy between what is acceptable in the real world and the virtual world, and people need to understand that there are things that are against the law and that there are norms, and the government is establishing its authority,” said Simone Rodan-Benzaquen, the head of the American Jewish Committee in France.

“Most antiracist organizations have been waiting for this for a very long time,” she added. “It’s important to know there’s a budget behind it.”

Jewish organizations welcomed the effort, as did Muslim groups, whose leaders said they had been consulted on a recent official report on racist acts against Jews, Muslims and other populations.

The report, published last week by the National Consultative Commission on Human Rights, a government watchdog, found that from 2013 to 2014, the number of anti-Semitic acts had risen to 851 from 423, and that there were more aggressive acts targeting Muslims in January of this year than there were during all of 2014.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Many of the recent attacks have been violent. Places of worship have been damaged and vandalized. Muslim women who wear a hijab, or head scarf, have been physically attacked, including a veiled pregnant woman who was recently beaten in Toulouse.

In December, a couple living in Créteil, where Mr. Valls spoke, were attacked in their home by thieves who tied them up, raped the woman and insisted that they had money hidden somewhere because they were Jewish.

In addition to a public awareness campaign on the dangers of racism and anti-Semitism, the government will encourage schools to partner with museums or memorials that raise awareness about the history of anti-Semitism and racism in France.

While the title of the government’s plan did not include the term “Islamophobia,” which is how French Muslims describe acts against them, Muslim leaders said they were gratified that the government did speak specifically about the need to fight anti-Muslim sentiments and actions in France.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The president of the republic, François Hollande, has used the word ‘Islamophobia,’ he has recognized Islamophobia,” said Abdallah Zekri, the director of the National Observatory Against Islamophobia at the French Council of the Muslim Faith.

However, Mr. Zekri said he noticed that Mr. Valls had avoided using the word in the past. “Many people do not want to hear the word ‘Islamophobia’; they want to hear the word ‘anti-Muslim,’ ” he said.

Mr. Valls’s presentation of the plan did not mention racism targeting people who are black or Roma, but all racist behavior would be covered by the new measures.